Michael McCormack distances himself from editorial backing death penalty

The new deputy prime minister, Michael McCormack, has distanced himself from a series of newspaper editorials in which he advocated for the death penalty, opposed anti-gay hate laws and compared women’s soccer to an “egg and spoon” race.

McCormack was the editor of Wagga Wagga’s Daily Advertiser from 1992 to 2001, and wrote the editorials in 1993 as part of his weekly column “From the editor’s desk”.

Since he entered politics, McCormack has consistently apologised for a column he wrote in May that year, where he said it was “unfortunate” that “gays are here to stay”. He apologised when he first ran for office in 2010, and again in August last year, saying: “I have grown and learned not only to tolerate, but to accept all people regardless of their sexual orientation.”

But in further editorials from the same period he said he “wasn’t sorry” about his views, branded himself “homophobic”, mocked women’s sport, and advocated for the death penalty.

On April 3 1993, he wrote: “This week’s spate of violent crimes has again rekindled the debate as to whether the death penalty should be re-introduced.

“Those opposed to capital punishment argue that it hasn’t deterred the incidence of crimes ...[and] there is also the possibility an innocent person may be put to death.

“However there is a strong and growing case for capital punishment. Let’s face it, perpetrators of heinous crimes are getting off far too lightly.”

He added that capital punishment was “an extremely sensitive and emotional debate” and that the death penalty should be decided through a referendum.

Another editorial supported the mandatory HIV testing of all prisoners, and called for the curtailment of prisoner’s rights.

“Don’t let do-gooders stop the testing of prisoners for HIV,” he wrote on 4 September. “From the moment someone is sentenced to ‘do time’ until they’re let out, that person gives up most of their rights.”

In other editorials, McCormack also argued against laws that would have opposed gay hate, and backed his initial column against “sordid homosexuality”.

Despite immediately receiving dozens of complaints from readers and gay rights groups, his next column was titled: “I’m not sorry, why should I be?”

“I have no pangs of guilt for telling the truth about what gays are doing to the world and the decent people who live in it,” he wrote. “I’ve been labelled homophobic by some of the many people who have been moved to write letters.

“Well if homophobic can be taken as an intense fear of homosexuals then that’s fine, call me homophobic ... If something isn’t done and done quickly to prevent homosexuals getting rights they don’t deserve then God help us.”

An editorial on 11 September argued against proposed legislation to prevent the vilification of gay people.

“Homosexuals want to be accepted as part of society, yet want special treatment,” he wrote. “If this had been passed now, what further ‘favouritism’ would these people get in future?”

In the lead-up to Sydney’s successful 2000 Olympics bid, McCormack also wrote that women’s soccer “trivialised” the Games.

“The IOC’s decision to include beach volleyball, mountain bike racing and women’s soccer at the 1996 Atlanta Games has surely given hope to tiddly-winks one day becoming an Olympic event. I can see it now … the 2000 Sydney Olympics with egg and spoon, three-legged and sack races, jelly wrestling and marbles.”

In another editorial on 9 October, he also called for the return of caning in high schools, saying “there is nothing wrong, in my opinion, with students ... being given a ‘stinging reminder’ about how to conduct themselves”.

On Wednesday, McCormack told Guardian Australia that none of these articles reflected his current views.

“Editorial views expressed more than 25 years ago in no way reflect how my views and community views have changed since publication,” he said. “Australia in the early 90s was very different to what it is now. I say this not to excuse the culture which once existed but to put the quotes in context.

“As people get older and start families, and grow as members of their community it is completely reasonable their views change over time.”

Rose Kulak, a coordinator at Amnesty International Australia, said the organisation would “reach out” to McCormack to discuss his stance on the death penalty.

“The worldwide trend is away from the death penalty and Amnesty International would certainly hope that the new deputy prime minister’s views have also progressed in line with this trend,” she said.