Sports Direct investors plan to vote against chairman's re-election

p

Keith Hellawell, who survived vote against him in 2016, has pledged to step down if he fails to win support of independent shareholders

Keith Hellawell remains in his job because of the backing of Sport Direct’s founder and majority shareholder, Mike Ashley.

Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters

The future of Keith Hellawell as Sports Direct’s chairman is hanging in the balance after a string of investment groups said they plan to vote him out next week in protest against corporate governance at the retail group.

Legal & General Investment Management (LGIM), Sports Direct’s fourth largest independent shareholder, has joined Royal London Asset Management (RLAM) and Aberdeen Asset Management (AAM) in pledging to vote against Hellawell’s re-election at the company’s annual general meeting on Wednesday.

Hellawell has pledged to step down if he does not win the backing of independent shareholders this year after more than half of them voted against him in 2016.

He only remains in his job because of the backing of Sports Direct’s founder and majority shareholder, Mike Ashley, who now controls more than 60%!o(MISSING)f the group’s shares.

Despite a number of changes in the way the company has operated since last year, including the exit of Dave Forsey as chief executive, independent investors remain concerned over the dominance of Ashley and poor treatment of workers. A Guardian investigation in 2015 prompted a parliamentary inquiry last year, in which MPs likened the depot to a Victorian workhouse.

Sacha Sadan, director of corporate governance at LGIM, said: “Legal & General has voted against the Sports Direct chairman re-election since 2014 due to concerns regarding the governance of the company. We escalated our concerns in 2016 by opposing the re-election of all of the non-executive directors. Although we are encouraged by some of the positive steps made over the past year, such as refreshing the board and labour relations, we believe progress is not sufficient to warrant supporting the chairman’s re-election this year.”

Ashley Hamilton Claxton, corporate governance manager at RLAM, which owns a £4m stake in Sports Direct, said it had no confidence in the ability of the retail group’s chairman and non-executive directors to provide effective oversight.

“In a year where some companies have made meaningful progress towards improving their corporate governance, Sports Direct continues to show a serious disregard for shareholders’ views about the governance and management of the company,” Hamilton said.

Paul Lee, head of corporate governance at AAM, said: “Sports Direct has made some improvements over the last year but there remain significant, entrenched governance problems. The review of governance and working practices is not fully independent and its results are not yet visible. The executive leadership and board structure remain works in progress. We still don’t have confidence that management is being properly and effectively overseen.”

Shareholder advisory firm Pirc and proxy voting service Manifest also issued reports criticising Hellawell. Pirc said Hellawell had “failed to show leadership in a critical period for the company”, which was demoted from the FTSE 100 last year after widespread criticism of governance of the company as well as trading difficulties.

However, the two largest independent shareholders, Odey Asset Management and Phoenix Asset Management, who together control more than 8%!o(MISSING)f Sports Direct’s stock, are expected to back Hellawell.

Tristan Chapple, a partner at Phoenix, which owns about 3.5%!,(MISSING) said: “We will be voting our shares in support of Keith Hellawell. We think the management are doing a good job of running the company.”

Unlike last year, when he toured the company’s controversial warehouse in Shirebrook with City analysts and journalists, Ashley is not expected to attend the AGM.

In a statement issued last week, the company said he faced “conflicting demands for his time in other areas of the business” and so, in a highly unusual move for a listed company, had won the agreement of the board not to be “required to attend”.