The Canadian sports quiz: featuring Wayne Gretzky and Olympic glory

Guardian Labs

Paid for by

Which Canadian won four medals in a single Olympic Games? What’s so special about the national figure skating team? Test your Canadian sports knowledge

Do you know your CFL from your NHL?

Photograph: Claus Andersen/Getty Images

Canada’s official sport is:

Ice hockey

Lacrosse

Both ice hockey and lacrosse Not only is Canada officially a bilingual country, it also features an official winter sport (ice hockey) and summer sport (lacrosse). Lacrosse is often played indoors as well, but the outdoor version is recognised as Canada’s oldest sport, first popularised by Canada’s indigenous peoples.

Who is awarded the Grey Cup?

The champion of the Canadian Football League (CFL) The nine-team CFL holds a special place in the hearts of Canadians: the rules and the dimensions of the pitch are slightly different to the version of gridiron played in the US – and the balls are bigger as well. The Toronto Argonauts are North America’s oldest existing professional sports franchise still using their original name and have won the most Grey Cups (16 in total).

The champion of the National Hockey League

The champion of the National Lacrosse League

A 16-year-old Penny Oleksiak won four medals in a single Olympic Games and set an Olympic record in which sport?

Athletics

Swimming Oleksiak brought home a gold, a silver and two bronze medals in 2016, setting an Olympic record in the 100m freestyle event. In doing so, she became the first Canadian to ever win four medals in a single Olympic Games.

Speed skating

Which Canadian team has won the most Stanley Cups as National Hockey League (NHL) champion?

The Montreal Canadiens The Montreal Canadiens – known colloquially as “Les Habitants” – have won 26 Stanley Cups, an NHL record. Their last came in 1993, which was also the last time a Canadian team won the Stanley Cup. But, with the Maple Leafs and Oilers fielding some of their most dynamic and youthful teams in decades, that may soon change.

The Toronto Maple Leafs

The Edmonton Oilers

Which sport is most popular as an activity for Canadian children?

Skiing

Hockey

Soccer Although hockey is ingrained in Canada’s national psyche, soccer still trumps all sports in terms of official participation among children and young people (ages 5-17). While Canada has only appeared in one World Cup – Mexico 1986 – Canadian boys and girls flock to fields every summer to play the beautiful game.

Which Canadian holds the record for most points scored in the NHL?

Wayne Gretzky Wayne Gretzky, otherwise known as “the great one”, holds 60 different NHL records and is generally considered to be the greatest ice hockey player of all time. The Brantford, Ontario native’s record of 2,857 points (894 goals, 1,963 assists – a combination of both records) may never be equalled.

Sidney Crosby

Gordie Howe

Which three Canadian cities have hosted the Olympic Games?

Montreal, Calgary, Vancouver Montreal hosted the Summer Olympics in 1976 and Calgary followed by hosting the Winter Olympics in 1988. But it was 2010’s Winter Olympics in Vancouver that were the most successful for the host nation, with the Canadian team winning more gold medals than any other country and an overall medal tally of 26, its highest to date.

Vancouver, Toronto, Montreal

Ottawa, Vancouver, Toronto

Why did Terry Fox attempt to run across Canada?

To raise money for cancer research After being diagnosed with osteosarcoma, a young Terry Fox was forced to have his right leg amputated. Spurred on by what he considered to be a relative lack of funding for cancer research, a 21-year-old Fox set out in 1980 to run coast-to-coast across Canada in an effort to raise awareness and money for the Canadian Cancer Society. Running the equivalent of a marathon every day, his goal was to raise $1 for cancer research from every Canadian. Although Fox was forced to stop his “Marathon of Hope” in Thunder Bay, Ontario as the cancer had spread to his lungs, the fundraising appeal tied to Fox’s initiative had by the next year raised $C24m – $1 for every one of Canada’s 24 million inhabitants at the time.

To train for the Paralympics

True or false: Canada has produced as many NBA No 1 overall draft picks as any other country besides the United States?

True Canadians Anthony Bennett and Andrew Wiggins were placed No 1 overall in the 2013 and 2014 NBA Drafts, respectively. Canada is tied for having two No 1 overall picks with Australia and Nigeria. Bennett and Wiggins are both from the Greater Toronto Area and are viewed as being products of Vince Carter’s reign in Toronto.

False

What is significant about the 1992 Toronto Blue Jays season?

Early games were played on snow-covered fields

The Blue Jays became Canada’s first Major League Baseball team

They won their first World Series MLB first expanded to Canada in 1969 with the addition of the Montreal Expos. And while there was a thick layer of snow on the ground for the Blue Jays’ first ever game on 7 April 1977, just over 15 years later the Blue Jays would become the first team from outside the US to win the World Series in a memorable six-game series against the Atlanta Braves. The Blue Jays would go on to repeat the effort as World Series champions the following season.

You got…

Challenge your friends