Are ‘non-competitive sports days’ really better for school kids?

A new survey suggests a majority of schools now opt for events without individual winners but some parents aren’t keen – and they may have a point

No winner takes all ... is some competition good for kids?

Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo

A ccording to a recent survey, 57%!o(MISSING)f parents with children at primary school say their sports day is “non-competitive”.

This means an event in which “everyone joins in via a team-focused event where individuals are not singled out”, says Families Online, which conducted the survey. In practice, this often results in schools dividing the children into groups that do compete, while parents yell encouragement from the sidelines. There are no school records to be broken and no tears on podiums. The survey found that 86%!o(MISSING)f its responders do not approve. They have Piers Morgan for company in this opinion, whether they welcome it or not.

This news does require some caveats. Fewer than 300 parents completed the survey– and it is likely that those motivated to do so may well be people annoyed by their children’s school’s policies.

Yet those annoyed parents may have a point, according to the sports psychologist Amanda Hills. “This business of saying that sports days need to be politically correct, with no element of competition, to me that’s absolute nonsense,” she says. “It doesn’t teach children anything useful, because life is competitive, and they have to learn to lose as well as win.” Indeed, it is unfair not to celebrate the achievements of a sporty child, Hills says, especially if they are not so celebrated in the classroom.

However, Hills – who has worked with children, in and out of schools, for more than 10 years – does believe that there is a risk of poisoning sport with too much competition, especially for younger kids. “Any sports day needs to be fun,” she says. “Because children will remember any positive or negative feelings to do with sport from that age. If they have a negative experience, it could put them off doing sport until their 20s.”

You see the problem. Yes, it is vital to give sporty children recognition, and to help everyone lose their fear of losing. On the other hand, no child should be given a bad experience of sport through relentless public failure, nor should they be led to feel that beating everybody is the point.

When I offer to put her in charge of an imaginary school, Hills favours “a broadly old-fashioned sports day”, with “prizes for every single person that has participated, in recognition that they have joined in”. These could take the form of little medals, but there would also be some individual trophies, and perhaps some “best team player” awards for team events. All must have prizes, in short, but some can have more than others.