Premier League: 10 things to look out for this weekend

Two teams struggling to score goals go toe-to-toe when Brighton and Chelsea get the Premier League ball rolling in Saturday’s early kick-off. Brighton have drawn seven blanks in their past 10 league games and have only scored more than once on one occasion in that time. Before their FA Cup draw with Norwich on Wednesday night – Antonio Conte’s side eventually won the tie on penalties – Chelsea had failed to score in three successive games; an uncharacteristic drought for the defending champions, who will be without the suspended Pedro and Álvaro Morata and are also likely to be missing the hamstrung Cesc Fàbregas. A team already over-reliant on Eden Hazard may have to depend on him more than ever and the Belgian is likely to play as a false nine in the absence of Morata. The unsurprising news that Andy Carroll is likely to be sidelined for four to six weeks with an ankle injury means the West Ham striker will not be lumbering to the rescue any time soon. In Glenn Murray, Brighton have something of a Carroll Lite and with two goals in his past three games, the striker will have no better opportunity to audition for one of the most unlikely transfers in Premier League history. BG

With Alexis Sánchez likely to complete his transfer from Arsenal soon, competition for places in Manchester United’s attack is about to become more fierce. But while it seems certain that Sánchez will walk straight into the side, it is worth remembering that United already have a talent who is comfortable on the left. Anthony Martial sparkled in the 3-0 win over Stoke, adding another fine goal to his collection after his lovely strike against Everton on New Year’s Day. However, for all that Martial is a favourite with United’s supporters, José Mourinho has often been impatient with the 22-year-old, who might be forced to step aside when Sánchez arrives. Henrikh Mkhitaryan’s ruthless treatment by Mourinho is a reminder that Martial will need to remain at his sharpest, starting against Burnley. JS

If any other team had put in as insipid a shift as the majority of Arsenal’s players did against Bournemouth last Sunday, you’d expect them to react by swatting aside their next opponents with extreme prejudice. But this is Arsenal, a squad where nothing is ever quite that simple. On Saturday they entertain Crystal Palace, whose only defeat in their past 12 Premier League games came at the hands of … Arsenal. Alexis Sánchez scored twice in that particular thriller but will not be available to inflict more misery on Palace, who have never won at the Emirates Stadium. Opposition they have lost to only once in their past 16 meetings should be ideal for an Arsenal team no doubt subjected to some lively pep-talks following last Sunday’s debacle, but Palace have developed a steeliness under Roy Hodgson that makes them anything but pushovers. BG

In the first half of their 1-0 home defeat to Manchester City at St James’ Park last month, Newcastle put on a display of rather hapless ultra-defensive football. City created a string of chances but converted only one of them as their opponents sat deep, occasionally touched the ball and absolutely never attacked with it. “We had to do what we did,” Rafael Benítez said afterwards but it gradually became clear that this approach was not necessary. Once it was apparent that the tactic would lead only to narrow defeat, Benítez brought on Dwight Gayle and Christian Atsu, his players started to venture forward and City were troubled; only an excellent goal-line clearance from Nicolás Otamendi protected their lead. City’s winning run ended with a goalless draw in their next game, when Crystal Palace missed a last-minute penalty, and since then both Bristol City and Liverpool have shown the potential reward of pressing and pushing the champions-elect. It will be interesting to see what approach Benítez takes in this game. Will he set his side out once again to frustrate, or will he take on board the lessons of that game and others since, and attack? SB

Goodison Park is one of many grounds likely to pay warm tribute to the late Cyrille Regis this weekend as they welcome West Brom, the club where he made his name. As they fondly recall their pioneering striker, Baggies fans could be excused for yearning for a striker with his pace, strength and penchant for long-range screamers – only Swansea and Brighton have scored fewer goals in the top flight this season. Everton have had their own problems in front of goal under Sam Allardyce – specifically an almost supernatural inability to register a single shot on target in three of their past five league games. Since having their pants pulled down by Tottenham last weekend, the club have brought in Theo Walcott. He should inject some much-needed pace in an Everton side that are often as slow as they are toothless and uninspiring. Walcott is likely to start on the right of a three alongside Wayne Rooney and Gylfi Sigurdsson, operating behind Cenk Tosun, who was forced to operate in splendid isolation on his Premier League debut at Wembley. A similarly unambitious approach from Allardyce’s side will surely not be tolerated by Everton fans on Saturday. BG

Mauricio Pochettino has regularly used a 3-4-3 system this season but he has consistently employed a 4-2-3-1 in recent weeks. Tottenham have had success with three at the back, especially in big games such as the home win over Liverpool, but it does not work quite as well without Toby Alderweireld, their most accomplished defender in possession, who remains sidelined by injury. Last weekend’s thrashing of Everton demonstrated the wisdom of Pochettino’s switch to a back four and there is no reason not to keep the formation in place for Sunday’s trip to Southampton, especially as it allows Tottenham to bolster their attack by playing the trio of Dele Alli, Christian Eriksen and Son Heung-min behind Harry Kane. JS

The first halves of the last eight matches between Swansea and Liverpool have featured precisely five goals. The second halves of those games have resulted in 22 goals being scored. The last two meetings alone have featured nine second-half goals, with Philippe Coutinho’s Boxing Day opener – and final goal for Liverpool – the only one to come before the break. Swansea have the overall first-half edge by three goals to two but have lost the second periods 16-7 on aggregate. It is far from uncommon for first halves to be more cagey than what follows – only Burnley, Huddersfield and Leicester have scored more goals in the first half, and in the Premier League overall there have been 262 first-half goals and 355 in the second half. Even so, these clubs’ recent records remain particularly polarised. SB

Watford’s only win in their past 10 games came in the corresponding fixture on Boxing Day, when they came from behind courtesy of a rare Kasper Schmeichel howler. Watford struggled in that game until Marco Silva introduced Stefan Okaka and switched Richarlison to the right, having already given the speedy Malian central defender Molla Wagué his first start to counter the pace of Jamie Vardy. Having scored in that game, Wagué has started each of Watford’s four games since and will no doubt be called upon to put a stop to Vardy’s trademark gallops in behind once again. In the aftermath of that defeat, Claude Puel publicly bemoaned Leicester’s habit of conceding from set pieces and they have conceded only two goals since – both scored by Liverpool’s Mo Salah from open play. Facing a side that has kept four consecutive clean sheets in all competitions, Watford will do well to snaffle all three points again. BG

Stephen Ireland’s return to Stoke’s starting XI at Old Trafford – almost three years after his last start in the league – was intriguingly timed. While he missed a couple of chances, his performance was encouraging and he was, at least, fit and willing enough to get in the right positions. It was all watched by his new manager, Paul Lambert, whose appointment by Aston Villa in 2012 led to Ireland being swiftly ostracised. Ireland appeared sporadically in the first half of the following season, but not once in 2013 before moving to Stoke, initially on loan, the following summer. “It’s important for every player to feel wanted and to be part of a family and to be honest I haven’t had that for a long, long time,” he said, after completing a permanent transfer early in 2014. While at Villa, Lambert described him as “a really talented footballer” and said that “it is up to me to get the best out of him”. He failed to do so then, and how their relationship blossoms over the next few months, starting on Saturday against Huddersfield, will be intriguing, and potentially crucial. SB

Callum Wilson is likely to receive a hot reception at the London Stadium after his stoppage-time handball equaliser denied West Ham a crucial victory on Boxing Day. The Bournemouth striker is also bound to be motivated for this rematch, after receiving his fair share of stick on social media from Hammers fans. Do not be surprised if Wilson drowns out the jeers. The 25-year-old’s confidence is high after he contributed a goal and an assist in Bournemouth’s victory over Arsenal, while he scored a hat-trick against West Ham back in August 2015. David Moyes’s improving defenders will need to have their wits about them. JS