Debate rages but VAR’s reckoning nears as football prepares for revolution

O n Monday, a small group of Belgian academics will hold the future of the world’s most popular sport in their hands. The team from the University of Leuven, led by Prof Werner Helsen, will travel to Zurich and present the findings of two years of study to the International Football Association Board (Ifab). If their findings are positive then video assistant referees will become part of football for good.

Technically speaking, the rubber stamp on any decision will be given by Ifab at its AGM in March. But next week will be when a project that has encompassed 14 different countries, hundreds of matches, thousands of officials, tens of thousands of incidents and innumerable camera angles will finally be assessed. So what can we expect?

English football is at an early stage of its relationship with this new technology. But the process, which allows important refereeing decisions to be reviewed in conjunction with an assistant watching the game on a screen, is already familiar elsewhere in the world. Major League Soccer in the United States has been trialling video review technology since last summer. Their scheme has been led by Howard Webb, with the Englishman who refereed the 2010 World Cup final heading up a process he describes as “very cautious”.

“Nobody really quite knew how things would go as it’s a pretty big change but overall it’s worked well,” he says. “The key idea is that it’s not about changing the way the game is played. If VAR works it’s because the game continues to run in a normal way. The referees make the calls, they don’t consider VAR, it only steps in when a clear mistake is made. The referee retains authority on the field, he has made a correct decision unless there’s clear evidence to contrary.”

Clear evidence, in Webb’s book, is when there is no option for debate; a penalty is given for handball but footage shows the ball only hit the chest. In all its trials, VAR can be used in four circumstances: goals/not goals; penalties/not penalties; straight red cards; and cases of mistaken identity. Furthermore, the Ifab mantra is “minimum interference – maximum benefit”. For Webb this is a formula that can work, and help referees in the process.

“The intention was never to be 100%!a(MISSING)ccurate,” he says. “That doesn’t quite exist in our sport, there’s so much subjectivity. There will still be some debate even with VAR. But what we can do is avoid real errors and give referees confidence. Up until now referees would have a voice in the back of their head saying: ‘I hope I didn’t make a mistake.’ Now, if they don’t hear the word ‘check’ from the VAR they know they haven’t made a clear error and can stay in the game. It gives them real confidence.”

Might this knowledge encourage referees to steer away from taking controversial decisions, leaving VAR to pick up the pieces? Webb says it could, but any “decision avoidance” would then be picked up when referees met their assessors. It is clear that Webb is working inside a system that is well-organised and, crucially, well-resourced. He talks of five-day “scrimmages” to train referees, with players role-playing incidents and of pre-launch work to manage expectations among fans.

Communication about the purpose and limits of VAR seems highly sensible and appears absent in another of those countries trialling the system, Portugal. There, VAR has been the source of constant debate and dispute, even conspiracy, and a staple for TV talk shows.

Luís Mateus, a journalist and director of the channel Maisfutebol, says: “When VAR was introduced, there was some advice not to expect it to end all mistakes, but people were not really well informed about when it could be used, or that it should be used only to correct a serious referee mistake. When the VAR is not sure of the mistake it does not correct anything. People did not understand this, coaches and players neither.”

What that led to is not less scrutiny of referees but more. And also of the VAR itself. “VAR is very political here,” says Mateus. “The main focus is not the referee any more, it is the VAR. Some big clubs have stepped in to defend it. Some managers have asked why VAR only acts in some occasions. For fans, if the VAR is used and does not work as they think it should they start to talk of conspiracy theories.”

There are other changes Mateus has noticed, such as the fact most goals are now celebrated twice, first when it goes in, then when there is no subsequent interjection from the VAR. This can be added to other unusual outcomes from the trials, such as a tie in the Dutch Cup last August that went from 1-0 to Feyenoord to 1-0 to Vitesse. Vitesse scored from a penalty they had previously been denied; the original decision had allowed Feyenoord to score on the counterattack.

Other unexpected outcomes are likely in future. If Prof Helsen gives the green light as expected next week, then it is all but certain that VAR will be employed in this summer’s World Cup. To say there will be a lot of pressure to make sure all runs smoothly is an understatement. Making sure everybody knows what it is for and how it works will be a good place to start.