Robbie Rogers, first out male athlete in US pro sports, retires from football

Robbie Rogers, the LA Galaxy defender who became the first openly gay male athlete in a major North American professional sport, is retiring from football.

Rogers came out while announcing his retirement in 2013 after being released by Leeds United. That retirement lasted less than three months before he signed with the Galaxy. In a statement, the 30-year-old paid tribute to the Galaxy for for their support.

“I would like to thank [former Galaxy coach] Bruce Arena for encouraging me to return to professional soccer after I came out as a gay man. I’d also like to thank all of my LA Galaxy team-mates for accepting me from the first day I stepped back into the locker room at StubHub Center,” he said.

“Finally, I’d like to thank the fans for their continued support throughout my career. I’ll never forget the feeling of returning to the field in my first game back. That feeling of acceptance and support pushed me as an athlete and as a person. Having the opportunity to win an MLS Cup in my hometown, with my hometown club as an openly gay man will be something I will carry with me for the rest of my life.”

As a young boy I dreamed of becoming a professional soccer player and representing my country in front of the world. But as a teenager I grew more and more consumed by fear and shame. And sadly, at some point the scared kid inside me decided that pursuing my dream meant sacrificing a part of myself and hiding my sexuality from the world instead of embracing it. My happiest years as a player are the ones where I could walk through the stadium at the end of games down the tunnel to my partner and son waiting for me at the other end. And my only regret in my eleven year career are the years I spent in the closet. I wish I could have found the courage that so many young individuals have shared with me in the past five years to live honestly and openly as a gay person. These are the young people that inspired me to overcome my fears and return to playing. They’re still the kids that send me letters every week. To those kids, I say thank you. My proudest accomplishment in my career is helping to create a more open sport for you. None of this would have been possible without my teammates and brothers on and off the field, without the LA Galaxy and Bruce Arena who saw me as another player and not a distraction, or without the fans who judged me for my work ethic and my play and not my sexuality. And finally, it couldn’t have been possible without my family, who loved me through all of my ups and downs and always supported my dreams and still do. Lastly to all of the women and men who are still frightened to share their truth with the world, I’d encourage you to come out. By sharing who you are you will not only be improving your own life but inspiring and literally saving the lives of young people across the world. You deserve to take that same walk, down the players tunnel and have your own partner or loved ones waiting for you. Again thank you to everyone who watched or help me follow these dreams. I could never have imagined the happiness I’ll take with me into retirement and into my next chapter.

A post shared by Robbie Rogers (@robbierogers) on Nov 7, 2017 at 11:47am PST

In 2013, he told the Guardian about his trepidation around coming out. “I was just fearful. I was very fearful how my team-mates were going to react. Was it going to change them? Even though I’d still be the same person would it change the way they acted towards me – when we were in the dressing room or the bus?”

In an Instagram post on Tuesday, Rogers said coming out was the best decision he had ever made. “Lastly to all of the women and men who are still frightened to share their truth with the world, I’d encourage you to come out,” he wrote. “By sharing who you are you will not only be improving your own life but inspiring and literally saving the lives of young people across the world. You deserve to take that same walk, down the players tunnel and have your own partner or loved ones waiting for you.

“Again thank you to everyone who watched or help me follow these dreams. I could never have imagined the happiness I’ll take with me into retirement and into my next chapter.”

Rogers, a left-back, is a 10-year MLS veteran and two-time All-Star who won league championships in 2008 and 2014. He also played at the 2008 Olympics for the US, and won 18 senior caps. He missed the entire 2017 season due to injuries, a problem that plagued him throughout his career.

NBA player Jason Collins came out in April 2013, shortly after Rogers made his announcement.