How to become a successful sports writer

p

Love watching sport? Enjoy writing? Learn how to transform your passions into a career, gain recognition and get paid in this competitive industry with Guardian sports journalist Emma John

Date: Tuesday 13 March 2018

Times: Evening course, 6.30pm-9.30pm

Emma John.

Photograph: Richard Saker for the Observer

Book now

Do you dream of getting paid to report from the Olympics? Would you like to do more with your football knowledge than just argue with fans on Twitter? Join Guardian sports journalist and author Emma John for a masterclass that will improve the way you write about sport and help you stand out in a crowded marketplace.

Good sports reporting has never been more in demand. In the age of digital journalism, the field is wide open for original thinking and witty writing. This evening is your chance to find out what the Guardian – and other platforms – really value in sportswriting and how you can impress them.

Emma will share key tips on live reporting, interviewing and pitching to editors, as well as provide an insight into writing a sports book.

Whether you’d like to have a career in sports journalism or write about sport on a casual basis and get paid doing it, this course is a must for anyone who has ever felt they have something burning to say about sport.

Some subjects covered...

What is a runner anyway? How to write a live match report

Uncovering the real story: how to interview athletes

Is there a book in it? First steps in sports book publishing

What does the desk want? How to pitch to sports editors

Tutor profile

Emma John is a sportswriter and author of Following On: A Memoir of Teenage Obsession and Terrible Cricket. She is a former deputy editor of the Observer magazine, Observer Sport Monthly and The Wisden Cricketer. She tweets @em_john.

Details

Book now

Date: Tuesday 13 March 2018

Times: Evening course, 6.30pm-9.30pm

Location: The Guardian, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU

Price: £99 plus £4.46 booking fee

Event capacity: 36

Complimentary refreshments included.

You may also be interested in...

Kickstart your freelance journalism career

Long-form journalism: A one-day workshop with Guardian writer Will Storr

Sign up to our newsletter and you’ll be among the first to find out about our latest courses and special offers. You can also follow us on Twitter, and read our latest articles and interviews on our blog.

To contact us, click here. Terms and conditions can be found here .

Returns policy

Tickets may be refunded if you contact us at least 14 days before the course start date. Please see our terms and conditions for more information on our refund policy.