World Cycling Revival preview: ‘An action-packed heritage sports extravaganza’

p

p

A three-day event celebrating all that is great about the bicycle in Herne Hill’s historic velodrome - be sure to come dressed for the part

On the right side of the track: cyclists racing at Herne Hill in 1980. Come and recreate the fun on 14 June

Photograph: Gerry Cranham/Offside

World Cycling Revival

Where Herne Hill Velodrome, London SE24

When 14-16 June

Price from £39, cyclingrevival.com

At a time when the boom in bicycles is echoing around the four corners of this country, it seems perverse to name an event a ‘revival’. But the inaugural P&P World Cycling Revival taking place in Herne Hill’s newly renovated historic velodrome, looks set to be one of the most joyful and fun-filled celebrations of the bicycle in decades.

Held over the three days in the middle of June, it’s set to be a high-end, action-packed heritage sporting extravaganza, blending music, food, untold jollification and plenty of track-based spills and thrills.

At the heart of the festival will be a comprehensive programme of racing, combining well-known disciplines with bizarre bike escapades which you’ll never have seen before (how about the one-hour penny farthing speed record attempt, cycle polo, or a £10,000 Brompton elimination race?) The Keirin trophy (above) will be the centrepiece of the revival. Incredibly popular in Japan, it’s fierce, fast and unpredictable. On top of all of that there are exhibitions and stands galore. And, if you fancy going along, you’re encouraged to wear vintage cycling gear or 1940s clothing. Enjoy!

Cool kit

Bags of style: no longer will you struggle to keep your possessions on the rack

A fit-all bag for anyone who loves cycle scheme bikes but hates their useless racks. It’s made from durable and highly water resistant Cordura 1000 and has been designed to especially to fit the cargo rack on the Santander bike without having to use the shock cord to hold things in place. No crush, no need to worry about your stuff falling out! The bag is kept in place by a snug elastic panel. It comes with a handy internal patch pocket for keys, bike fob or wallet/purse, and a detachable and adjustable shoulder strap, and magnetic poppers allow it to be cinched in, or expanded out when full. London bike bag £35, bikesharebags.co.uk

Email Martin at martin.love@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @MartinLove166