'I was number one. And they wanted me to wear a crop top': cleaning up UK sport

S port is going through a profound existential crisis. There have been allegations of sexism in the cycling and football world; there is rampant inequality (in November it was revealed that the combined pay of women footballers in the top seven football leagues in the world equals that of Brazilian forward Neymar’s). Racism persists: in 2016, England footballer Eniola Aluko made a complaint that the national team’s coach Mark Sampson had told her to make sure her Nigerian family did not bring ebola to Wembley.

Today, a group of athletes determined to change sport for the better – former javelin thrower Goldie Sayers, badminton player and silver medallist Gail Emms, Paralympic wheelchair racer Anne Wafula Strike, and Lewes FC footballers Jonté Smith and Faye Baker – meet at Lee Valley Athletics Centre in London to discuss the way forward (click on ‘i’ on bottom right of photo).

Last August, Emms, who won silver at the 2004 Olympics in Athens, attracted headlines when she wrote a blog in which she admitted she had suffered depression since quitting sport; she said she was not prepared for life and at the age of 40 felt unemployable. She is now campaigning about mental health issues, and believes coaches rarely exercise their duty of care to athletes. “People have finally started questioning whether we are pushing people too far, to go to the extremes of losing their morals and their health.”

Sayers agrees: she thinks they should use their experiences to encourage the next generation to study and develop passions outside sport. “I would only coach someone now if they were studying or working, because I think being a full-time athlete is probably the worst thing you can do for your career.”

The problem is, Emms says, it was not in the interest of her coaches to do that. “Their funding was on the line if I didn’t get a medal. They did not want me to think about another career.”

In her sporting prime, Emms says, she was pressured into being a “Badminton Barbie”. “My sponsor turned up and said, ‘We’ve got some new kit for you. I laid it out and it looked like an eight-year-old girl’s clothes. They said, ‘We thought you could wear a crop top and some hot pants.’ And I went, ‘I’m not a 400m athlete – I lunge. And this is not good for lunging. I don’t want to wear this. Can’t I just wear a normal T-shirt?’ And they said, ‘But all the cameras are on you.’ Then this guy said, ‘I don’t suppose you could have a couple of sunbeds because cellulite shows up on TV lighting.’ My jaw just... broke.”

Emms says many athletes end up with body dysmorphia. “I used to be constantly told I was fat. I got to the point where I said, if you go anywhere near me with those calipers [to measure fat] again I’m going to shove them where the sun don’t shine. I was .5%!o(MISSING)ver their limit. I was number one in the world. That’s the only time I ever spoke out.”

“Are you an athlete or a model?” Wafula Strike asks, appalled.

“As a woman in sport you’re very aware that if you play the game you will get more media coverage,” Emms says. “When you do see female athletes in the newspapers, they are the prettier ones.”

“And if you are blond you get more work,” says Wafula Strike.

“Yes!” says Emms. “Look at Sharapova, and her sponsorship money.”

Wafula Strike laughs. “I’ll go for plastic surgery. Then dye my hair. Then get myself a new nose.” She says that there are still so many prejudices about how disabled athletes are supposed to look. “When you’re disabled you’re not supposed to look good. You meet people who say ‘Oh God, you’re pretty, and you’re in a wheelchair.’”

“It’s true,” Wafula Strike says. “People don’t understand you can have a disability and still be clever and put on lipstick. We have to keep fighting these prejudices.”

Wafula Strike grew up in Kenya and contracted polio when she was two, paralysing her from the chest down. She came to the UK in 2000 and became a member of Team GB in 2006. As she tells her story, everybody listens in shocked silence. Wafula Strike raced in the same category as the then Paralympian record medallist Tanni Grey-Thompson. She quickly established herself as the main rival to Grey-Thompson, who was made a dame in 2005 and a baroness in 2010 for her contribution to Paralympic sport.

At the 2006 Paralympic World Championships, Wafula Strike’s coach Ian Thompson (who also coached his wife Grey-Thompson), told officials he believed Wafula Strike had too much body movement for the category she was racing in. She was subsequently moved into a more able-bodied category, even though her medical records went missing before the test.

“When my reclassification happened, everybody expected that I would quit the following day. But I said no, get me races in my new class. The following day I was on the start line with tears in my eyes. I wanted to prove a point, that it’s not all about medals or fame or money.” But the reclassification destroyed her career.

Emms is almost in tears. “OK you have broken my heart, it’s official,” she says.

In written evidence to a parliamentary select committee last November, Peter Eriksson, a former head coach at UK Athletics’ Paralympic programme, said that Ian Thompson had played an “unethical role” in the reclassification of Wafula Strike, adding that the reclassification “would give his personal athlete [Grey-Thompson] less competition”. Grey-Thompson has stressed that neither she nor her husband had any part in the reclassification, and that she had “no personal or vested” interest.

Emms raises the subject of drugs cheats in badminton. “People take drugs for recovery. It doesn’t necessarily make you play badminton better. But it makes you faster on the court, stronger, and it makes you recover better for the next game. You don’t see people for a year, then they’re back bigger and stronger, with a deeper voice, and you’re thinking, ‘Mmm, wonder what you’ve been doing.’”

Sayers is going to have a huge party when she finally receives her Olympic bronze medal, she says. “I got a call over 18 months ago, saying that a Russian athlete who had finished ahead of me in Beijing in 2008 had failed a doping test. Ten years is a long time, but I do feel grateful that testing has taken place.”

Sayers, 35, and now retired from athletics, always suspected her rivals were cheating. As soon as she received the news, she knew exactly who it was: Russian javelin thrower Mariya Abakumova.

“What was it that sent alarm bells ringing?” asks Emms.

They look at a “before” picture, in which Abakumova looks strong but normal, and an “after” picture where she looks like the Incredible Hulk. “Oh. My. God!” Emms screams.

“I remember waiting in a dinner queue in the hotel, and hearing two blokes behind me. And I turned around and it was two tiny blond 400m runners. A lot of them have acne and deep voices at 30,” Sayers says.

She paid a heavy price for finishing fourth at Beijing, in terms of sponsorship, advertising, status and her sense of self. “When you’re given a medal and you stand on a rostrum, that makes a huge difference to your confidence. Because I was always a few centimetres off, I thought, ‘What else do I need to do?’ Then you push even harder. It wasn’t a coincidence that I then had a whole spate of injuries.”

When she retired last year, Sayers said she was angry and disenchanted. But times have moved on. “I refuse to be bitter about it, because otherwise you’d never get over it.” “Goldie, I admire you for not being bitter,” says Wafula Strike. “If I were you I would be furious. My class was changed with no proper grounds, with no medical evidence. I wasn’t a happy person.”

Centre-forward Smith and goalkeeper Baker have been listening attentively. They play for Lewes FC, a semi-professional football team that is the first in the country to pay its male and female teams equally. I ask them if they have suffered any discrimination.

Well, says Smith, diffidently, there was one episode. “I got an offer to play in Vietnam when I was 20, 21 for a ridiculous amount of money – £15,000 a month after tax. I left after four days. The very first day I went to warm up with the rest of the team, and I was told I had to warm up over there with two other African players.”

“Oh my goodness!” Emms says.

“It gets worse,” Smith says. “After the game, I pick up my food and sit down with them and they say no, you have to sit over there with the African players. I wouldn’t have stayed for anything.” This happened two years ago.

Now he is paid around £200 a week for Lewes FC. Both he and Baker are proud of the club’s commitment to equality. “A lot of people still feel it’s a man’s sport,” says Baker, who is also a lawyer. “It’s just nice to be at a club where you’re on an equal playing field, and for the men’s team not to have their nose out of joint about it.”

She accepts that it’s easier to pay equally when the wages are low. “Look at a club like Man City. Will the women ever get paid the same as their male players? And if the men go all the way through the leagues, will our equality stick?”

Collectively, these athletes are doing their bit to make sport more honest. Emms is hoping to help prepare athletes for life after sport, Sayers will continue to campaign for clean sport, and Wafula Strike now sits on the UK Athletics Board. She does not believe what happened to her would occur today: “Last year was an eye-opener.”

Smith says you can already see the impact of Lewes FC’s equal pay initiative, announced last July. “There are now more young girls coming in to train. And that’s how you start.”

• Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).