Para-badminton athlete’s £5,000 sports wheelchair trashed after BA flight

p

p

Trip to Finland for training was wasted and airline has ignored complaint

Sharon Barnes relies on her expensive sports wheelchair when playing badminton - now it’s broken.

Photograph: Ben Radford/Getty Images

Can you help me as I am desperate. I am an international para-badminton wheelchair athlete for England who flew on British Airways to Finland in August to attend a training camp.

I was looking forward to training and learning to improve my career with other top players, and travelled with my specially designed sports wheelchair, and my manual one.

When we landed I discovered that my sports wheelchair had been trashed by the baggage handlers and was no longer usable. As a result the whole trip was wasted, as I could not take part in the training programme. Ever since, I have been trying to get the airline to compensate me for what happened.

I am due to attend the Para-Badminton World Championships in South Korea in November and am scared the same thing will happen.

I asked colleagues if they could loan me a chair but they are all bespoke. As a result I have had to borrow money from my sister and friends to purchase another chair at a cost of £5,095. BA is just ignoring me. Sharon Barnes, London

Given the huge rise in the number of wheelchair athletes that tour the world with their expensive chairs, one would hope that the airlines would have adapted their policies to find a way to stop this sort of thing happening.

We have received a noticeable increase in complaints about BA luggage problems in recent weeks, but that doesn’t excuse the airline from not responding.

Fortunately, we were able to push your complaint to the top of the list and the airline has apologised and agreed to pay the replacement £5,000+ cost.

“We have also spoken with both airports’ wheelchair service providers to seek assurances that our customers are receiving proper care and attention during their journeys,” it says.

You should be aware that this settlement is significantly higher than that set out in the Montreal Convention which limits the liability of airlines following a baggage claim to around £1,200. The EU has looked at whether the convention’s terms discriminate against those with disabilities.

In the meantime, you need to make sure that the replacement chair is insured. Allianz says it is a proud sponsor of ParalympicsGB, so maybe it could come up with a policy?

This article was amended on 13 November 2017 to remove a reference to wheelchair users that does not comply with Guardian style.

strong consumer.champions@theguardian.com strong subject to our terms and conditions .