Pitching Up: ancient sports for Ireland's most ethnically diverse town

Ballyhaunis in the west of Ireland is at first glance a traditional farming town, a place that in the past has been deeply affected by the emigration of its young. But today Ballyhaunis is unique in an Irish context. The majority of children in the local community school speak neither English nor Gaelic at home and part of the waves of inward migration from Pakistani, eastern European and African communities. The local policeman Darran Conlon has a mission. He is trying to teach the younger generation of these immigrants how to play traditional Gaelic games, not only to help welcome them to the community but also to simply ensure that the local club – the lifeblood of the town – can actually field a team.

Winner of the Guardian Sheffield Doc/Fest pitch 2016.

Maurice O’Brien is an Irish documentary director/producer who has spent over a decade making arts, current affairs and history films for the BBC and others while based in London and Glasgow. He previously shot a film in County Mayo for BBC4 about the photographer Tom Wood, his short ‘Buffalo Dreams’ screened at film festivals around the world and he is currently working on a project for the Irish Film Board about Ronald Reagan’s visit to his ‘ancestral home’ of Ballyporeen in 1984.

The Guardian has tracked the problems with the direct provision system throughout this decade and, more recently, the poor treatment of migrant workers in Ireland, as well as the difficulty of getting into the country in the first place. We’ve also looked more broadly at how to treat child refugees and written in praise of Gaelic sports as being real sports of the people.

In the last 12 months, the city of Dearborn, MI has been thrown into conflict: a conflict of fear, ideology and identity politics – and at its heart the central question of what it means to be an American today. Dearborn has the largest proportion of Muslims in the USA and the largest mosque in America. Once famous for being the birthplace of Ford and the American dream, almost half the residents now speak Arabic. This documentary reveals both sides of the unfolding events – and shows how fear and hostility have grown as Trump has come to dominate the US political discourse. Released Friday 4th August

Can’t wait for the next film? Our documentary archive will keep you entertained in the meantime. Can’t wait for the next film? Our documentary archive will keep you entertained in the meantime.

Sheffield Doc/Fest Shorts - Tuesday 18th July, Bertha Dochouse, London

A selection of short documentaries, bringing the best of Sheffield Doc/Fest 2017 to the big screen in London. Highlights include this year’s Short Doc award winner The Rabbit Hunt, New Talent special mention Übermensch, and the Guardian’s own Fish Story

If you like what we do with documentaries at the Guardian, then please consider becoming a supporter. Our ability to investigate and expose stories such as these is made possible by our supporters. Join today to support our journalism.