Tessa Jowell did exceptional work for those who’d lost loved ones

She took on the role of humanitarian minister in addition to her role as secretary of state for culture, media and sport and was there in 2005 after the 7 July London bombings, writes

Gerald Oppenheim

Tessa Jowell and Gordon Brown lay wreaths at King’s Cross station in 2007 in memory of the victims killed in the 2005 London bombings.

Photograph: Fiona Hanson/PA

Tributes have rightly been paid to Tessa Jowell’s courage and inspiration to others during her last illness after the diagnosis in 2017 that she had the most aggressive form of brain cancer (Tessa Jowell dies aged 70, 13 May). Much has also been said about her career as an MP and minister, as the key player in the team that brought the 2012 Olympics to London and then, from 2015, in the Lords.

Less has been said about her inspirational role as a champion of those who were affected by loss of loved ones on 9/11 when the then prime minister, Tony Blair, asked her to take on the role of humanitarian minister in addition to her role as secretary of state for culture, media and sport. Tessa was there in 2005 after the 7 July London bombings supporting those who had lost loved ones and those who were injured, so often in life-changing ways. She was there to support them in every way she could and was also unstinting in her encouragement for the work of the London Bombings Relief Charitable Fund, LET’s predecessor from 2005 to 2008.

Tessa also helped to actively organise the 10th anniversary remembrance events on 7 July 2015, both the service in St Paul’s Cathedral and the memorial event in Hyde Park that day. She played a key role with those she had got to know in 2005 and had stayed in touch with regularly since that time. Had it not been for her illness, I am confident that she would have wanted to be involved supporting those affected by the terrorist events in London and Manchester in 2017 as well as supporting the residents of Grenfell Tower.

She was exceptional in many ways and will be greatly missed. We pay tribute to her and offer many thanks again for her warmth and humanity.

Gerald Oppenheim

Chair of the trustees, London Emergencies Trust

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters