Government rejects proposal to teach boxing in prisons

A former justice minister has accused the government of “cowardice” and “policymaking through dogma” after a member of the cabinet told colleagues to dismiss the findings of an unpublished independent report that calls for prisoners to be taught boxing and other martial arts as part of their rehabilitation.

The ex-justice minister, Phillip Lee – the Tory member for Bracknell, who resigned last month over Brexit – says the government’s attitude to the report, which he commissioned, shows how politics is failing the people.

In his view, the government is more interested in getting quick headlines than in developing policies based on hard evidence.

“It often feels as though politics rewards the wrong things: headlines rather than hard work,” he writes on theguardian.com. “And that the slog of trawling through evidence to work out what really turns people’s lives around is often wasted.”

He continues: “It is no wonder people think there is no integrity in politics. We need to end this culture of governance by cowardice.”\

In what appeared to be a pre-emptive strike to kill off the idea of teaching martial arts in prisons, the Tory party chairman, Brandon Lewis, recently circulated a letter to ministerial colleagues and Whitehall departments, making it clear the ideas were unacceptable.

Lewis wrote: “I do not believe the public would find favour with the concept of giving combat sports training to those who have been sent to jail for violent conduct, or indeed, to those convicted of sexual offences or robbery.

“Indeed, given a proportion will sadly reoffend, this would invariably result in further crimes being committed – aided by their enhanced combat training.

“I would not want a position where the government could end up being held responsible for harm to victims, that could be viewed as a consequence of a change in government policy.”

The report by Prof Rosie Meek of Royal Holloway, University of London, draws on extensive evidence from community groups and other research showing that physical activity, including boxing and martial arts, can have a beneficial effect, particularly on young people who are struggling to develop self-discipline, self-respect and respect for others.

It calls for pilot schemes to be developed in prisons, using groups that have run successful martial arts schemes in communities. Meek also suggests that prison staff use their own expertise in the field.

The report was submitted to the Ministry of Justice but its publication has been delayed several times, prompting speculation that it could be ditched. The ministry said on Saturday that it would be published later in the summer, although no date has been set.

Meek told the Observer she would resist any attempts by ministers to “coerce” her into editing the report. “My report is evidence-based and independent,” she said.

“Obviously it is up to the government how it responds, but I would be very disappointed if they attempted to coerce me into removing or editing parts of it. There is a lot of evidence from community settings that boxing and martial arts have a very beneficial effect on the lives of many young people.”

Last week she told the digital, culture, media and sport select committee that provision for sport and culture in prison was a “lottery”.

“There are pockets of good practice going on across the [prison] estate but they are certainly not widespread,” Meek told the committee.

“We know that going into prison with a range of programmes – be they arts, music or sport-based – are some of the most effective ways of engaging with some of the most difficult-to-engage prisoners.

“The staff need to have the time and resource to support those activities, and they also need the leadership to encourage them to bring in community organisations and provide room in the day-to-day prison routine to support these sport-based programmes.”

Lee argues that the evidence is clear: “In custody, physical activity can help to lower levels of antisocial behaviour and violence. Outside prison, it becomes an alternative to a life of crime.

“That is why this proposal was part of a much wider strategy I developed to harness the power of sport in our criminal justice system with the help of the forthcoming report by Prof Rosie Meek.

“We know that going into prison with a range of programmes – be they arts, music or sport-based – are some of the most effective ways of engaging with some of the most difficult-to-engage prisoners.

“The staff need to have the time and resource to support those activities and they also need the leadership to encourage them to bring in community organisations and provide room in the day-to-day prison routine to support these sport-based programmes.”