Trevor Immelman says ‘my best is not good enough’ despite round of 64

There was a time when holding off the challenge of Tiger Woods was almost worthy of an extra prize. Two players who did just that in the past have enjoyed a revival at the Scottish Open at Gullane.

Robert Rock, the 41-year-old Englishman, resisted Woods to win the Abu Dhabi Championship in 2012. On Friday he added a 63 to his opening 64 to lead at halfway at 13 under par. Rock lies two shots clear of Tyrrell Hatton and Sweden’s Jens Dantorp. Rickie Fowler, the 2015 champion, is a shot further back but the most remarkable story of the second day concerned another player whose finest hour came at Woods’ expense.

A decade has now passed since Trevor Immelman triumphed at Augusta National, with Woods consigned to second. It would have been legitimate to ask what had happened to one of the most interesting individuals in the game until recently, when Immelman reappeared on the scene as a US-based golf analyst.

Still only 38, the South African’s second round of 64 at the Scottish Open which left him five shots off the lead was not sufficient for him to assert an upturn in professional fortunes is imminent. Instead, the world No 1,380 offered candid assessment.

“I’m probably a little better at holding the microphone than when I’m holding the golf club,” he said. “It’s kind of confusing, to be honest. I love the game of golf, I know all the courses on both the tours and I know the players and caddies, so I feel like I have a nice perspective because I’m still kind of part of it.

“But I’m also a little concerned that my best golf is nowhere near what it would need to be to compete at the highest level. To be quite honest with you, that is a very difficult time mentally for an athlete; everybody faces it at some point but when that time comes and you start to question, ‘Am I good enough to be out there’, it’s a tough time.”

It would, thankfully, be wrong to infer any trace of bitterness within Immelman. “This game has been really, really good to me,” he said. “I have nothing to complain about whatsoever. I was lucky that I played my best when Tiger was playing his best, rode his coattails for a few years and did quite well. I’m very thankful for the opportunities given to me.”

Whereas now it is endearing to see Immelman at peace with himself and his game, there must have been bleak moments. He has not recorded a major top-10 finish since winning at Augusta, with his last five Masters visits resulting in missed cuts. Immelman has not played any of golf’s other three marquee events since 2012.

“It’s difficult because to get to that level, let’s call it top-15 or 20 in the world, there’s something very special there,” he explained. “For the most part, those guys and girls that would be in that position have been great since they were young. They were great juniors, they were maybe the best junior in the world. They would have won amateur tournaments all over the world and they would have climbed their way through the tours on to the main tours and played well there. So their whole life they have spent winning, so to speak.

“So when that stops happening, mentally it can be very, very hard to deal with. And so that’s why I think having a good balance in your life, finding some other things that you enjoy … quite honestly for me, doing the TV stuff has been a fantastic distraction.”

Immelman’s professional demise may well be linked to golf itself rather than the player. He was never a long driver of the ball, in direct contrast to the booming distances as achieved by the best in the world today. “The Masters [win] was 10 years ago; that’s a long time in golf, a long time in any sport,” he added.

“There’s very few that can go at that level for so long. That’s why I don’t think a guy like Phil Mickelson gets enough credit; a guy like Ernie Els doesn’t get enough credit. These guys that have hung around for that length of time and played at that high a level, it’s unbelievable, let me tell you. It’s really incredible.”

There may be a silver lining. Immelman’s eight-under at Gullane means he is firmly in contention at the Scottish Open. The final three Open Championship spots are available here. “If I’m on the 18th tee on Sunday and a chance of that it might cross my mind, but there is a long way to go. I’m just going to go enjoy this 64. It’s the best round I’ve shot in a long time.” Nobody can reasonably begrudge him that.