Sports quiz of the week: sackings, strike partnerships and a sensational start

p

p

Who keep winning? Who kept scoring? And who could have been a contender?

Sergio Agüero and Gabriel Jesus strike up a familiar pose.

Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images

Sergio Agüero and Gabriel Jesus were both on the scoresheet for Manchester City last weekend (and the weekend before). They have now scored nine league goals between them this season. Which two strikers contributed 55 goals to their club in a single Premier League season?

Andy Cole and Peter Beardsley for Newcastle in 1993-94 Cole scored 34, with Beardsley adding 21.

Alan Shearer and Chris Sutton for Blackburn in 1994-95

Dwight Yorke and Andy Cole for Manchester United in 1998-99

Daniel Sturridge and Luis Suárez for Liverpool in 2013-14

Why were Celta Vigo fined by La Liga this week?

Because their players were "wearing their socks too low"

Three of their players mooned to a group of photographers who came to watch them train

Their manager did an interview while wearing a set of branded headphones

All eight of their games this season have ended nil-nil and they’ve been accused of "unsportsmanlike tactics".

Not enough fans have attended their home matches this season La Liga rules state that clubs must fill a minimum of 70%!o(MISSING)f their capacity for each home game

What is the missing number: ???-110, 114-114, 113-115?

101

114

118 Adalaide Byrd awarded 118 points to Canelo Álvarez for his performance against Gennady Golovkin, who was the victor in the eyes of most viewers.

122

What was unexpected about Mark Beaumont’s attempt to cycle "around the world in 80 days"?

He wasn't able to complete it as someone stole his bike

The ferry he had booked from Dover to Calais was delayed and he finished in 81 days

He arrived home and found out his sponsor had gone bust and hadn’t been paying him

He finished it two days earlier than planned Beaumont set a world record by finishing after 78 days, 14 hours and 14 minutes. He cycled for 16 hours a day and made his way through 16 countries.

Gareth Barry made his 632nd appearance in the Premier League on Saturday, equalling Ryan Giggs’ record. What Premier League record does Barry own all to himself?

Most appearances without winning the title

Oldest goalscorer

Most yellow cards Barry has been booked 119 times in the league. Wayne Rooney is second on that list, with 100.

First person to score a hat-trick for two different clubs

Mark Sampson, the manager of the England women’s football team, was sacked on Wednesday. How had the team performed the night before?

They lost 2-0

They lost 4-1

The drew 3-3

They won 6-0 Sam Allardyce, the last manager of the men’s team, also lost his job after a victory.

Which football club in the UK has not dropped a point yet this season?

Manchester City

Celtic

Coleraine The mighty Bannsiders have won all seven of their Premiership games this season. Local rivals Ballymena, meanwhile, have only seven points from seven games.

Llandudno

Rio Ferdinand has taken up boxing after a long and successful career as a footballer. Which other sport did the teenage Ferdinand reject before signing a contract with West Ham?

Cycling

Ballet When asked about his dalliance with ballet, Ferdinand said: "At first I didn’t tell my mates because they would have ripped me all day long. I just told them I was doing drama. I got to a point where my dad said: 'Do you want to be a footballer or a ballet dancer? You have to make a decision because it’s taking up too much of your time.' Luckily I chose football! But the ballet had a good effect on my career because of the flexibility, strength and balance you learn."

Table tennis

Snooker

Which other athlete took up boxing late in his sporting career and went on to win a British title?

Andrew Flintoff

Curtis Woodhouse Woodhouse had a good football career, playing in the Premier League and representing England U21s, before he took up boxing and became British light-welterweight champion.

Leon McKenzie

Nobby Stiles

Jake LaMotta, the fighter immortalised in Martin Scorsese's film Raging Bull, died this week at the age of 95. What was LaMotta's other nickname?

The Brooklyn bruiser

The Staten Island stomper

The Manhattan maniac

The Bronx Bull He coulda been a contender.

The Queensberry ruler

You got…

Challenge your friends