Sebastian Vettel needs to keep cool to turn up F1 heat on Lewis Hamilton

L ast season the Azerbaijan Grand Prix produced a dramatic end to what had been a good-natured rivalry in battle for the championship between Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel.

When Vettel lost his temper and barged the British driver his lack of control exposed a weakness from which Hamilton emerged psychologically with the upper hand. A year on in Baku, however, the German could not be exhibiting a calmer, more controlled disposition and his quiet confidence is ominous for Hamilton.

With two victories from three grands prix Vettel leads Hamilton, who is still winless, by nine points. Last year going into this race which was the eighth of the season, the Ferrari driver’s lead was 12 and then, like now, both drivers knew tiny margins were likely to decide the title.

The pair came together with Hamilton leading behind the safety car. Vettel hit him from behind and, believing the Mercedes driver had brake-tested him, pulled alongside and swerved to the right into the side of his rival’s car. Hamilton called it disgraceful and Vettel apologised.

Hamilton took encouragement from the incident. When asked it if showed Vettel was not as mentally strong as had been thought, he was clear: “It’s been obvious for some time,” Hamilton said. “I would never have thought that would have happened. We as a team know that can be a positive for us.”

He was referring to incidents in 2016 when Vettel was angry on the track. The honeymoon of his first year with Ferrari was over and having car in which he could not compete was clearly hugely frustrating. It culminated at the Mexican Grand Prix when, duelling with Max Verstappen and furious that the Dutch driver had cut the first chicane, Vettel launched a tirade on the radio that ended with an attack on the race director, Charlie Whiting. “Here’s a message to Charlie: fuck off. Honestly, fuck off,” he said.

At the last round in China, Verstappen once again tangled with the German. Vettel was in a position to secure at least fourth after the safety car had given Red Bull the chance to come through the field on new tyres. But when Verstappen hit him, going too hot into the hairpin, the spin and damage it caused meant Vettel finish eighth, dropping eight points and allowing Hamilton to close the gap.

Verstappen admitted he was at fault and apologised to Vettel. The four-times world champion had every reason to be livid. Instead he was magnanimous. “He made a mistake, he locked up, which happens,” he said.

“I guess he misjudged and sort of compromised both our results. He has done enough races but this can happen also if you have done 300 races.”

It was a reaction that could not be further from that of Mexico two years ago or Baku last year and reflects both the calm assuredness he has shown this season and that he knows the importance of not showing Hamilton any chinks in his armour.

Vettel is at his very best when he is confident in the car beneath him. There is every sign he has huge faith in this year’s Ferrari and is right to do so. In testing the car looked a little difficult to push hard through the corners and maintain a tight line. Three races in and the Scuderia look to have it licked. Their adoption of the long wheelbase, high-rake approach has proved successful and they have outpaced Mercedes at two races.

Crucially they also appear to have a wider temperature operating window for their tyres – a factor that may prove to be the single biggest mechanical element in deciding the championship. Vettel has the appearance of a driver who is very much feeling this and hence keeping a very tight rein on how he runs his campaign this year.

Hamilton and Mercedes’ task looks to be the more trying. The team admitted after China that how the tyres were working was having an impact on performance. Given the car is a development of last year’s title-winning machine, it is likely this is proving the decisive factor.

Hamilton has expressed concern the Ferrari is working well everywhere while he has struggled in hot and cold temperatures.

His opinion is shared by the Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff. “If we are in the sweet spot, the car is very fast,” he said. “We have seen occasions more than Ferrari where the tyre drops out because it is too hot, or drops out because it is too low.”

Mercedes have not gone three races without a win since the turbo-hybrid era began in 2014 and this weekend, the final flyaway race before F1 returns to western Europe, is a vital indicator of whether they have a better handle on their task.

Baku is a power circuit, the first of this season, that would usually reward the Mercedes engine but if Ferrari and Vettel take another win, the German will be leaving Azerbaijan with every reason to be in absolutely splendid temper.