Andy Murray stays true to his deadpan self in debut as pundit

W atching Andy Murray make his debut as a pundit on BBC One’s Wimbledon coverage, it was hard to believe this was the same person as the grumpy, introverted teenager who once so offended the sensibilities of home counties’ tennis fans.

Having made the decision to pull out of Wimbledon the day before the tournament began, as he continues his tentative comeback from a hip operation, the two-times champion at SW19 swapped Centre Court for the TV studio on Tuesday.

Affable, insightful and with a mischievous sense of humour, Murray proved himself a natural and there seems sure to be a place for him in the BBC’s Wimbledon team when he finally hangs up his racket, should he want it.

Part of Murray’s charm, admittedly not for everyone, is that he is his own man. When asked a question he thinks unfair or ridiculous – often just after stepping off court covered in sweat – he has never been shy to make his feelings clear.

He retained that honesty and sense of doing things his way in the BBC studio. While Tim Henman, sat beside him, was dressed in a blue blazer and tie, Murray opted for a more informal look with an open-neck shirt and grey jacket.

They began with an earnest discussion of Murray’s recovery; he is moving well on the hard courts and will compete at the Washington Open in just under three weeks time. When Sue Barker suggested there was a chance of him being injured again, he almost snorted: “There is always a chance you can re-injure yourself.” In other words: “Obvs.”

But if he can sometimes seem blunt, he is also incredibly self-effacing. Murray has always been able to laugh at himself, and his dry sense of humour was shown off to maximum effect as he and Henman riffed off one another. When Henman asked his friend who would win an opinion poll as to whom was the more boring of the pair, Murray quipped: “It would be tight ... can we do it [the poll]?”

When video was shown of Murray doing very strange exercises with bands and he was asked what he was doing, he deadpanned: “I don’t actually know.” He happily related that his coach Jamie Delgado, playing in the invitation doubles at SW19, had “lost pretty comfortably” earlier and described Henman, who was at Murray’s wedding, as “a bit of a wine snob. [And] he’s not just a snob about wine”.

But it was not all fun and games. When it came to talking about the prospects for those remaining in the draw, he was prepared to stick his neck out – an essential quality for a pundit. Asked whether anyone could stop Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal reaching the men’s final (the obvious answer being “no”) he said he could see Novak Djokovic doing so.

When Henman and Barker challenged Murray on Djokovic’s mental state, given that the 12-times Grand Slam winner had appeared angry with the partisan crowd during his match on Saturday against Kyle Edmund, the former BritishNo 1, who knows a thing or two about on-court petulance, said the fact that Djokovic won showed it had actually helped him.

He also demonstrated that he had done his homework, not always the case with pundits. Discussing the quarter-final match-up between the big servers John Isner and Milos Raonic: “They’ve played nine sets and seven of them have been tie-breaks,” he said, correctly.

He saved the biggest bombshell till last, revealing that he watches Love Island, although “not every night” , and tried to blame his 19-year-old protege Katie Swan.

If they covered a lot of bases, one topic conspicuous by its absence was a matter that has been occupying a lot of attention at this year’s championships: the World Cup.

Murray was famously pilloried when he joked that he would be supporting “anyone but England” at the 2006 tournament after being ribbed about Scotland’s failure to qualify.

Despite the stick he took previously, everything about Murray’s performance on Thursday suggested if the question had been put to him again, the 2018 version would have handled it with the deftness of one of his drop shots.