Who will win the BBC Sports Personality of the Year team award?

From England’s victorious youth football squads to cricket’s county championship underdogs, there are strong claims aplenty this year

Essex celebrate with the First Division Championship trophy at Chelmsford in September - their first top flight title since 1992.

Photograph: Steven Paston/PA

British & Irish Lions

They did not beat the double world champions over three compelling Tests, but Warren Gatland’s Lions deserve a place on the list for their part in a thrilling series in New Zealand that will stand the test of time. Often under the cosh, there were times when it looked as if the Lions would be hopelessly outmatched against a team as brilliant and confident as the All Blacks, especially after losing 30-15 in the first Test. Instead of allowing their hosts to run away with it, Gatland’s tourists responded with a magnificent performance in the second Test, fighting hard to win 24-21. Their task was still daunting, though: the final Test was at Eden Park and the All Blacks had not lost there since 1994. Yet the Lions held their nerve, battling to a 15-15 draw to fly home with their pride and dignity intact. It was the first drawn Lions series since 1955 but few were complaining.

England’s youth football teams

It has not been easy for England supporters to keep faith with the men’s senior team over the past decade, but there is plenty of cause for optimism at youth level after a wildly successful year. The under-21s played their part, despite paying tribute to tradition by losing a penalty shootout to Germany in their Euro 2017 semi-final, but it was the under-17 and under-20 sides who really made the case by winning their respective World Cups. The under-20s started it off in South Korea in June, with Dominic Solanke impressing and Dominic Calvert-Lewin scoring the only goal in the final against Venezuela. The under-17s demonstrated great resolve in India, fighting back from 2-0 down in the final to beat Spain 5-2 thanks to inspirational performances from Phil Foden, Callum Hudson-Odoi and Rhian Brewster. Making history once is impressive enough, but doing it twice in the same year takes some topping.

England Women cricket team

All looked lost when India cruised to 190 for three in the World Cup final. England, who had set their opponents the modest target of 229, were bracing themselves for defeat. A boisterous Lord’s crowd was preparing to salute India, who must have thought their name was on the trophy – and then it all started to go a bit crazy. One wicket sparked a collapse, allowing England to believe again, and a famous turnaround looked certain to be completed when Rajeshwari Gayakwad sent the ball invitingly into the sky. It was the simplest of catches … and Jenny Gunn spilled it. “It felt like she dropped the World Cup, to be honest,” Heather Knight, England’s captain, said. But what made this nine-run victory so compelling was the way the host nation refused to lie down, and soon Anya Shrubsole was bowling Gayakwad to complete her frantic six-wicket haul. The spirit of Knight’s England Women makes this team hard to ignore.

GB Men’s 4x100m relay team

It was supposed to be Usain Bolt’s glorious farewell run. Instead, the Jamaican legend ended it face down on the London Stadium track after pulling up with a torn hamstring and the cheers from the crowd were directed towards Great Britain’s 4x100m relay team, who ran the race of their lives to win an unlikely gold medal. It was one of the most stunning moments of a weird and wonderful World Athletics Championships and Bolt’s misfortune did not detract from British success. The competition was still fierce but CJ Ujah made a sensational start, Adam Gemili made up for the disappointment of being left out of the 200m, Danny Talbot made sure there was no slip-up and Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake kept his nerve on the final lap, holding off the USA’s Christian Coleman to cross the line first. The time was 37.47sec – a national record and the fastest in the world this year – and it was sporting drama at its best.

Essex County Cricket Club

For the most captivating underdog story of 2017, perhaps it is worth turning to cricket’s County Championship. And what a year it was for Essex. They would be an eclectic choice but their story oozes charm. They had been away from the First Division for six years and promoted sides tend not to win the title straight away (the last time Essex went up, they were promptly relegated). To hell with how things are supposed to be done, however. Essex’s young team played brilliantly all season, remaining unbeaten, as the club became champions for the first time since 1992. It was a particularly special moment for their veteran wicketkeeper, James Foster, who never imagined that he would lift the trophy one day. “We got on a roll and just kept winning,” the 37-year-old said. Would anyone begrudge them another gong?