Wilting Maria Sharapova may still be suffering from effects of ban

Russian’s first-round defeat at Wimbledon was a big surprise but she has shown few signs since returning from her 15-month ban that she will add to her grand slam tally

Maria Sharapova lost 7-6, 6-7, 6-4 to Vitalia Diatchenko at Wimbledon on Tuesday, the first time she has gone out in the first round here.

Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images

W hither Maria Sharapova? Of all the upsets at this year’s Wimbledon the exit of the 2004 champion in the first round late on Tuesday almost slipped under the radar, happening, as it did, while England were making it through to the quarter-finals of the World Cup.

In tennis terms, though, the 31-year-old’s defeat raised more than a few eyebrows. Her 7-6, 6-7, 6-4 defeat by Vitalia Diatchenko of Russia was the first time she has gone out in the first round here and the world No 138 was the lowest-ranked player she has lost to at a grand slam event since she was beaten by the world No 154, Alla Kudryatseva of Russia, in the second round here in 2008.

Sharapova put a brave face on things, saying she has come a long way since last year. It is now more than 14 months since she returned to the WTA Tour following her 15-month ban, imposed for taking meldonium, a drug she failed to realise had been added to the World Anti-Doping Authority banned list at the start of 2017.

Twelve months ago, with her ranking at 179, she had been due to enter the Wimbledon qualifying event but pulled out because of injury. A year on she was seeded No 24 here. Her defeat was a big surprise but, if she stays fit for the rest of this year, she is still on course to get herself back towards the top 10.

When she came back to the Tour Sharapova said one of her main goals was to add to her five grand slam titles. In her four grand slam events since returning she has reached the fourth round, third round, quarter-finals and first round. She has won one tournament, in Tianjin last October.

The manner of this defeat must rankle after she threw away a 7-6, 5-2 lead against a woman who had never made it past the first round before here.

Kim Clijsters, the former world No 1 working as a pundit at this year’s Wimbledon and as an ambassador for the WTA Finals, was as surprised as anyone to see Sharapova lose in such fashion and wondered whether the 31-year-old was finding life on Tour difficult, in more ways than one.

“I’ve thought about it and it has to be hard for her, dealing with what happened and facing a lot of people,” Clijsters told the Guardian. “I think that to me would be the hardest. I saw her documentary and she mentions it, all of a sudden you worry about the person in the street, what do they think about you. Here you see a lot of people that you know, knew, didn’t know, and that has to be hard. Whatever the intentions were, that has to be hard.”

Sharapova is far from the only big name to go out in the first few days. The US Open champion Sloane Stephens went out on day one and Petra Kvitova, the two-times champion, was riddled with nerves as she was beaten in round one on Tuesday.

Clijsters said the new breed of players on the WTA Tour was no longer overawed by the big names. “When you’re a Serena or a Sharapova the younger players who are now at the WTA level admired them for many, many years, grew up watching them,” she said. “They’re capable of playing them now and they don’t fear them any more. They’re going all out, playing some of their best tennis. That’s why I’m curious to see, these two players who beat them, how will they be able to act against somebody they’re supposed to beat.”