Mark Cavendish: ‘I’m not scared but I think of the consequences more’

It is 11 years since Mark Cavendish first rode the Tour de France, 10 since the first of his 30 stage wins. The Manx sprinter is now 33. A cycling magazine put him on the cover earlier this year and described him as an elder statesman. In late May, he and his wife Peta had their third child, a son named Casper; in the last 12 months he has had a series of horrendous crashes, prompting a French newspaper to run an interview with him headlined “Now, I’m scared”.

A change can be sensed in Cavendish, but a subtle one: at one point he tells me, in passing, “gone are the days when I got angry.” The passion is there still, but it is channelled. He speaks of his sport with more distance. He is more aware of the sacrifices he has to make: he has seen Casper on only six days since he was born, and speaks of months spent at his Italian training base “climbing, climbing, climbing” in order to survive what will be his 12th Tour de France when the race begins on Saturday.

Hanging over him at the start of this Tour, as it did last year, is the number 34: the record for stage wins at the race, held by Eddy Merckx. Cavendish sits on 30; if he can match Merckx, it will be a monumental achievement, reflecting consistency over the years which is unique for any sprinter other than Mario Cipollini. “At the end of the day, four seems close but it’s so far away,” he says. In the context of the 30 he has won – and the four stages he won in 2016 - it is attainable, but with this caveat: each year since he started the Tour, he has made the point that winning a single stage will be tough.

“Thirty-four [stages] is the target of my career. I’d like to get it but it is easier to say than actually to do. The perception is that I’ve always made winning look easy. People think it’s easy, but they don’t see what’s behind it, the time away from the family. The days spent climbing, training out in all weather, climbing but trying to keep the speed for the sprint. I’m lucky that when I do win, I make it look easy.”

His condition, he says, is as good as it can be, with one final hit-out at last Sunday’s national championships, where he was the only Tour starter who troubled to turn up. “I’m on my last week of training for the Tour, so I’m on the back foot, but it’s nice to ride. As I see it I represent my country at the worlds and Olympics, so the least I can do is fight for the national title.”

With eight opportunities, this is one of the better Tours in recent years for the sprinters, something he welcomes. “You just have to try. I just have to go and be competitive for my sponsors. Whether I win or lose, it’s good for them; what we do at Dimension Data feels different, because of the Qubeka charity: we are riding to put 5,000 children on bikes in rural South Africa. We measure our success on that as well as anything else. They’ve put a strong team around me, even if we are missing Bernie Eisel. If my best isn’t good enough, so be it.”

What of that headline: has maturity - not to mention those crashes, including the collision with Peter Sagan that left him nursing a broken shoulder at last year’s Tour de France - changed the way he sees the obvious dangers of the final kilometre? “I’m not scared but I think of the consequences more. My shoulder from last year will never, ever be right again. I can feel it on my bike, it affects my position when I sprint, it’s permanently damaged me, for the rest of my life. For sure I think about the consequences, but what happened was 2017. It’s the past. That incident is completely in the past. I’m looking forward to this year’s Tour, I just want to get on with it.”

On the other hand, this is, he says, the first year that he has been “genuinely scared” of the mountains in a Tour de France. “Some of the stages are the hardest I’ve seen in my career. In the gruppetto you make time up on descents and flat; the 60km stage [in the Pyrenees] isn’t so bad, but in the Alpe d’Huez one [stage 12] there is so few places where you can get time back. Cycling is unique in that in any other sport I’d be in a different weight category or discipline. What I do is a different sport to what Chris Froome does.”

Cavendish faces a packed schedule after the Tour: his personal sportif in the Cotswolds, the European championship in Glasgow, where he will be part of a strong Great Britain team, then possibly the Tour of Britain. This winter he will again take to the track, with his mind cast forward two years hence, to the Tokyo Olympics, where he could potentially target the Madison, even though he is not entirely happy with recent tweaks to the event’s format in which gaining points takes precedence over gaining laps on the field.

In the immediate future, however, Saturday’s opening sprint into Fontenay-le-Comte is what matters. “There is always a lot of stress leading into the Tour, so I just want to get going. I want to get the fruit of all the work I’ve put in. All that matters is to be first across the line.” And there, nothing has changed in the last 10 years.