Alexander Zverev has a champion’s impatience as Wimbledon looms

P rodigies in any sport have an unmistakable gunslinger’s swagger. They stand tall, talk with dead-eye certainty and shoot straight. If Alexander Zverev were never to make it as a tennis player he could look back at his highlights reel and see a lot of Billy the Kid in his demeanour.

“Where you from, buddy?” Zverev asked Jonathan Pinfield, the journalist who brought levity and plain-language insight to press conferences at Roland Garros this year. It was not a threat, even if the 21-year-old sounded young-dude smart-arse. As the tall, blond German worked his way through the draw in a succession of tough five-setters before bailing out, exhausted, in the quarter-finals, where Dominic Thiem had his number in three sets, he revealed a lighter side, and player and journalist settled down to some unusual bonding.

Told Pinfield was from Yorkshire, Zverev said: “If I ever make a tournament there, I’m coming just because of that accent. Love it. I didn’t understand a word you’re saying but it’s not important.”

Maybe not that important to a millionaire athlete on the threshold of what could be an outstanding career – but he meant no harm. It is his confident young way. People around him – including Jez Green, Andy Murray’s long-time conditioner until a couple of years ago – have witnessed a champion’s impatience in Zverev, even though his junior career was not as outstanding as those of some peers. He wanted to get on with the business of winning big titles on the big Tour. He respected his fellow young Turks but he also wanted to leave them behind as quickly as he could.

Green’s part in the process has been pivotal. He has had to manage the physical development of a lean young player who was sprouting like a mighty rose but who also needed the stability of a sound muscle base as well as strong levers allied to good technique.

There are some who wonder still about Zverev’s occasionally awkward hitting posture – shooting from the hip, as it were, rather than training his sights coldly on his target. He can still find himself out of position and off-balance when hitting from places not optimal to the best strike of the ball off the ground. That, however, is coming together. With every match he is looking the part. As the fourth seed at Wimbledon, behind Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal and Marin Cilic, he knows he is a target. He plays the Australian James Duckworth in the first round.

Roger Federer (1) v Dusan Lajovic

Lukas Lacko v Benjamin Bonzi

Ivo Karlovic v Mikhail Youzhny

Jan-Lennard Struff v Leonardo Mayer (32)

Adrian Mannarino (22) v Christian Garin

Ryan Harrison v Roberto Carballes Baena

Guillermo García-López v Gastao Elias

Daniil Medvedev v Borna Coric (16)

Sam Querrey (11) v Jordan Thompson

Sergiy Stakhovsky v João Sousa

Laslo Djere  v Paolo Lorenzi

Gaël Monfils v Richard Gasquet (23)

Philipp Kohlschreiber (25) v Evgeny Donskoy

Gilles Muller v Michael Mmoh

John-Patrick Smith v Andreas Seppi

Norbert Gombos v Kevin Anderson (8)

Marin Cilic (3) v Yoshihito Nishioka

Jason Kubler v Guido Pella

Ricardas Berankis v MacKenzie McDonald

Nicolas Jarry v Filip Krajinovic (28)

Lucas Pouille (17) v Denis Kudla

Peter Polansky v Dennis Novak

John Millman v Stefano Travaglia

Liam Broady v Milos Raonic (13)

John Isner (9) v Yannick Maden

Steve Johnson v Ruben Bemelmans

Aljaz Bedene v Cameron Norrie

Radu Albotv Pablo Carreño-Busta (20)

Stefanos Tsitsipas (31) v Grégoire Barrère

Malek Jaziri v Jared Donaldson

Yuki Bhambri v Thomas Fabbiano

Stan Wawrinka v Grigor Dimitrov (6)

Dominic Thiem (7) v Marcos Baghdatis

David Ferrer v Karen Khachanov

Julien Benneteau v Marton Fucsovics

Frances Tiafoe v Fernando Verdasco (30)

Kyle Edmund (21) v Alex Bolt

Yuichi Sugita v Bradley Klahn

Guido Andreozzi v Horacio Zeballos

Tennys Sandgren v Novak Djokovic (12)

Nick Kyrgios (15) v Denis Istomin

Marius Copil v Robin Haase

Bernard Tomic v Hubert Hurkacz

Christian Harrison v Kei Nishikori (24)

Damir Dzumhur (27) v Maximilian Marterer

Ernests Gulbis v Jay Clarke

Lorenzo Sonego v Taylor Harry Fritz

James Duckworth v Alexander Zverev (4)

Juan Martín Del Potro (5) v Peter Gojowczyk

Feliciano López v Federico Delbonis

Benoît Paire v Andy Murray

Jeremy Chardy v Denis Shapovalov (26)

Jack Sock (18) v Matteo Berrettini

Gilles Simon v Nikoloz Basilashvili

Albert Ramos-Viñolas v Stephane Robert

Matthew Ebden v David Goffin (10)

Diego Schwartzman (14) v Mirza Basic

Jiri Vesely v Florian Mayer

Pablo Cuevas v Alexandr Dolgopolov

Taro Daniel  v Fabio Fognini (19)

Marco Cecchinato (29) v Alex De Minaur

Pierre-Hugues Herbert  v Mischa Zverev

Vasek Pospisil v Mikhail Kukushkin

Dudi Sela v Rafael Nadal (2)

Seeds in bold

British players in italics

Photograph: Tom Jenkins

Zverev, strictly, is an Alex Jr. His father, who played to a decent level, reached a career high 175 and represented the Soviet Union in Davis Cup, is now listed as Sr. But his youngest son does not need the defining suffix. Everyone knows who he is – just as Floyd Mayweather Jr really did not have to tell the boxing world he was the son of Floyd Sr, whom he surpassed in deed and notoriety. Zverev, whose older brother, Mischa, is as in awe of him as the rest of the Tour, is the third piece in the Zverev tennis machine but there can be no doubt who the fulcrum is.

They often travel as a unit, hitting, dining and talking together, pooling the genes handed down from Alexander and his wife, Irina, who is also a tennis coach. In 1991, the Zverevs moved to Germany, where Alexander was born and still has a home in Hamburg, although he has all the traits of an internationalist, having spent so much time following his American-based brother about on the circuit and living now in Monte Carlo. He speaks fluent Russian, German and English, with an American twang.

Zverev’s low-key exit at Roland Garros at the hands of the player who probably will challenge him most strongly for the world No 1 ranking once the ancien r égime has crumbled (no date fixed, yet), surprised some and vindicated others. Thiem went on to lose the final against Nadal, a sentence akin to being granted the keys to Sing Sing, only to have them whipped away once inside.

But, just as Thiem has unthinking detractors on his case, so there were critics hounding Zverev. At the Rome Masters he had his cowboy hat on again when confronted with scatter-gun questions about his lack of previous success in Paris – and this after he had played Nadal in the final. He had won 14 clay matches in a row – and now he had lost to the best clay-courter of them all. After Nadal had beaten him 6-1, 1-6, 6-3 Zverev was asked how he would cope with the pressure of five-setters at the upcoming French Open – where he had failed to get out of qualifying on his first visit in 2015, lost to Thiem in the third round of the main draw the following year and in four sets to Fernando Verdasco in the first round in 2017. He smiled the sharpshooter’s smile and made it clear his history in Paris was not a problem for him. “I just lost the final. We’ll talk about Paris [later]. I have a media day there. I think you’ll be there, as well.”

It was becoming increasingly obvious that to take Zverev on was to expect some return fire. He was not going to be anybody’s easy target. He had an ally in the legend who beat him, as well. Nadal suggested talk of Zverev being vulnerable at Roland Garros at 21 after three visits was ludicrous.

Zverev had a low-key hit at Boodles this week, beating the US Open semi-finalist Pablo Carreno Busta 6-4, 6-4. Inevitably, he was asked how far he thought he could go at Wimbledon. “I don’t have a set round that I’m happy with,” he said. “There’s a golden trophy at the end, which I may or may not win this year, but my goal is to win it at one point. This is what I’m working for, this is what I’m here for, this is why I do extra hours in the gym and extra hours on court.”