Sports quiz of the week: Ashes, All Blacks defeats and a full-kit father

p

p

Who ruled the pop charts? Who has dubious style? And who stayed positive?

Neymar in Paris.

Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images

Which of these cricket teams has won a Test in Australia in the last five years?

England

India

New Zealand

Pakistan

South Africa The last time Australia hosted the Ashes, they won 5-0.

Sri Lanka

West Indies

England have played 20 Tests at the Gabba in Brisbane and only won four of them. Which song was No1 in the UK music charts when England last won an Ashes Test at the ground?

Every Breath You Take by The Police in 1983

Breath After Breath by Duran Duran in 1984

Take My Breath Away by Berlin in 1986 Top Gun was the highest grossing film of the year – just in front of Crocodile Dundee. Good luck England.

Breathe In, Breathe Out by Kanye West in 2004

What did Wigan player Ryan Colclough wear to the hospital for the birth of his son this week?

The same thing his father wore when he was born: a Bolton Wanderers shirt

A full Wigan kit: shirt, shorts and socks Colclough had been playing for the club that night. He scored twice before his manager subbed him off so he could make it to the hospital in time.

Not much. He took his shirt off to celebrate and the midwife gave him “a yellow card”

A special “birth shirt” made by Wigan sponsors JJB Sports

Complete this quote from New England Patriots coach Bill Belichick: "You have two NFL franchises in an area ...

" ... where Trump is King. Argh. What a drag"

" ... where the food is just absolutely awful – disgusting really. Vile”

" ... where I don’t know how stable the geological plates are – but nothing happened so that was good” Speaking after the Patriots had played the Oakland Raiders in Mexico City, he added: "We’re fortunate there was no volcano eruptions or earthquakes, or anything else while we were down there."

" ... that needs an overnight flight – and it's a disaster for carbon emissions"

Yakubu retired this week on his 35th birthday. What footballing feat has been achieved by him, Wayne Rooney and Raúl?

They are all their country’s top scorers

They all scored Champions League hat-tricks as teenagers Raúl scored his for Real Madrid against Ferencvaros in 1995; Yakubu scored his for Maccabi Haifa against Olympiakos in 2002; and Wayne Rooney scored his for Manchester United against Fenerbahce in 2004.

They have all been top scorers at a home Olympics

All three of them scored against Arsenal on their debuts

Which of these teams has not made it to the semi-finals of the Rugby League World Cup?

England

New Zealand England will qualify for their first final since 1995 if they beat Tonga at the weekend.

Fiji

Tonga

Australia

Who said: “The thrill of scoring a goal, you get that same thrill when you save a good chance. Tim Howard was my idol. I used to have a little Tim Howard shirt”?

Hugo Lloris

Jordan Pickford

Manuel Neuer

Marcus Rashford Rashford played as a keeper in his first season as a youngster at Fletcher Moss Rangers.

When Wales beat the All Blacks in Cardiff in December 1953, they took the all-time record between the teams to: Wales 3-1 New Zealand. What is it now?

Wales 3-30 New Zealand The teams meet in Cardiff on Saturday afternoon with Wales looking for their first win against the All Blacks in 64 years.

Wales 4-42 New Zealand

Wales 5-30 New Zealand

Wales 6-52 New Zealand

What was unusual about Olly Lee’s goal for Luton Town against Cambridge United last weekend?

Lee has played for the club his whole career – 19 seasons – and it was his first goal for them

His father, former England player Rob Lee, was managing the opposition

He shot from one postal code (LU1) and the ball hit the net in another (LU4) Lee shot from 65 yards out and one side of Luton’s ground, Kenilworth Road, has a different postcode to the other.

Both the goal and the assist should have been penalised as handballs

Which football manager said this after seeing his team lose a lead and lose a match: “In a strange way, I thought there were lots of good moments for us”?

Tony Pulis

Jürgen Klopp

David Moyes

Brendan Rodgers Celtic went 1-0 up against Paris Saint-Germain in the second minute but ended up losing 7-1.

You got…

Challenge your friends