LeBron James brings the LA Lakers what they crave the most: relevance

T he Los Angeles Lakers needed to matter again, so they had no choice but to convince LeBron James to join their team. Basketball’s most glamorous franchise has never done irrelevance well. They need a name on front of the Staples Center to make the building crackle and 41 nights of LaVar and Lonzo Ball still left them miles from the Golden State Warriors.

In signing James, his longtime nemesis Lance Stephenson and Warriors center JaVale McGee on Sunday, the Lakers bought themselves into contention. They didn’t purchase an NBA title but they moved a lot closer than they were two days ago. Given the make-up of the West, the Lakers probably are the conference’s third- or fourth-best team and the possibility of a Kawhi Leonard trade still lingers.

At worst, Los Angeles now has a team that can go a round in the playoffs, if not two. Given the recent Lakers, marching into the lottery to then stumble to the bottom of the division, this is a massive upgrade.

But James has been to eight straight NBA finals. He didn’t come to LA to win 48 games a year and make it past the first-round of the playoffs. He chose to be a Laker for what will probably be the four last great years of his career to win championships. Whether it’s right or not, he is constantly compared to Michael Jordan and the ultimate measure of his career for many is how close he can get to Jordan’s six titles.

It’s telling that the two men who have been able to convince James to leave Cleveland are Pat Riley and Magic Johnson. Riley, the Miami Heat president, coached Magic – the current Lakers president – and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar to four NBA championships in the 1980s. And while Riley has won three more of his own as a coach and executive in Miami, the roots of Riley and Johnson’s success are with the 80s Showtime Lakers and their championship machine.

By leaving the NBA’s much weaker East, LeBron has entered a Western Conference loaded with talent, making it much harder for him to keep his finals streak alive. But he may not be as far from another championship as everyone thinks. While Golden State’s dynasty remain alive and Kevin Durant’s new contract ensures the Warriors will be title contenders for at least one more year, Golden State won’t be able to keep their team together for much longer. As their coach, Steve Kerr, learned when trying to motivate a listless team last fall, the will to win again and again and again is harder to find with each passing year.

Maybe the Warriors win another title this coming season but maintaining a championship run will be more challenging after that. Klay Thompson, for instance, will be a free agent after next year and given that his father Mychael was a forward on the last two of Johnson and Riley’s Laker title teams as well as a current Lakers broadcast commentator, Klay could be a perfect fit alongside James in LA. Not only would he bring the Lakers a great outside shooter but his departure would remove a key piece of the Warriors core no matter how good Durant, Steph Curry and Draymond Green remain.

Next season, with a bigger salary cap, the Lakers can also pursue Leonard (should they not trade for him), and maybe Durant, Jimmy Butler or Kyrie Irving – who was critical to James’s one championship in Cleveland. The coming season’s Lakers may only go a round or two deep in the playoffs but they could be legitimate championship contenders in 2019-20.

There is also this. The Lakers, as they stand today without Leonard, are a good team. Stephenson gives them an edge they’ve lacked, a relentless defender who will annoy opponents’ best scorers. McGee is a skilled center. Lonzo Ball, despite his failings as a shooter, is wonderful at seeing the whole court. James will make him better. James will also be good for young, promising players like Brandon Ingram, Kentavious Caldwell-Pope, Julius Randle and Kyle Kuzma – should they all remain.

The Cavaliers team James pulled to the finals earlier this year was not as gifted as these Lakers. Remember, too, the Cavs probably would have won Game 1 of the finals were it not for JR Smith’s blunder at the end of regulation.Who knows if a first-game win in Golden State’s arena would have turned the series in Cleveland’s favor but the finals would have been much closer.

If James could rattle the Warriors as he did with the team he had in Cleveland last year, imagine what he can do with a young but talented group like the one he has now. The one thing everyone should know about James is to never question his ability to put a team on his back and carry it far.

Magic Johnson has delivered again for the only franchise he has ever known. On Sunday, he bought the Lakers relevance, a shot at adding to the row of championship banners that line the Staples Center wall. Somehow, you have to figure, LeBron James will find a way to add at least one more.