NSW display class, style and flamboyance in State of Origin win

Q ueensland threw everything and the kitchen sink at New South Wales but it wasn’t enough to prevent the Blues winning just their second series in 13 attempts after Brad Fittler’s faith in attacking rugby league paid dividends in Sydney.

The Blues fell behind to an early 10-0 deficit before roaring back and then holding on for a dramatic 18-14 win to secure a series victory and allow Fittler to open his Origin coaching career with two straight wins.

After wingers Valentine Holmes and Dane Gagai put the Maroons on the board, Josh Addo-Carr’s try exposed some Maroons defensive issues, but it was a controversial penalty try to Boyd Cordner that put New South Wales into a lead that would never be headed.

Cordner was awarded a penalty try after being taken out by Queensland half Ben Hunt. It was the correct decision but one that totally deflated a Maroons outfit who had tried so valiantly, entering the match as the biggest Origin outsiders this decade.

Hunt was lucky to remain on the field but that was about the only break he got as he endured a forgettable evening that could bring about a premature end to his Origin career.

Sign up to receive the latest Australian sports stories every day

Team selection will be at the forefront of Queensland coach Kevin Walters’ mind after a gritty but disappointing display at ANZ Stadium. Hunt will do well to stave off the challenges of both Kalyn Ponga and Daly Cherry-Evans. Veteran centre Will Chambers’ position will also surely come into question after a poor display in both attack and defence while props Dylan Napa and Jarrod Wallace will do well to retain their positions.

New South Wales went in to halftime with a 12-10 lead but when Latrell Mitchell extended soon after with a bullocking try, the gulf may as well have been as big as Sydney Harbour. There was no coming back for the Maroons.

They tried valiantly. Chambers scored a try that put Queensland right back in it. But a lack of poise – a trait that Queensland has possessed in spades over the last decade – proved costly. Both Hunt and Chambers belted the ball dead off the boot while there was a distinct lack of direct running when required.

Billy Slater was magnificent in his return from injury and was instrumental in the first try to Holmes, linking into the backline with class. When the game was on the line in the second stanza though, Slater struggled to find the space to impact the clash.

New South Wales lacked the dominance they had in the series opener but Fittler’s faith in playing attacking weapons proved crucial. Addo-Carr showed soft footwork to score the Blues’ opener while Mitchell let rip like a missile into space when he powered over Chambers to score a decisive try.

The Blues didn’t have the space or freedom afforded in the series opener but they made the most of the few opportunities that came their way.

For just the second time in the last 13 years, Queensland must look inward after a series defeat. Unlike in 2014 though, there is no Cameron Smith or Johnathan Thurston to look to for salvation. The cold, hard reality has hit Queensland. Tomorrow is now. The future is here. And it looks very different to the golden era from which they just came.

One bright spot for Walters will be the sublime debut of Ponga. Playing in a roving role and well out of position from his usual fullback role at Newcastle, he looked none of his tender years, breaking the line and running for 108 metres. With Slater certain to farewell the Maroons in Game 3 at Suncorp Stadium, Walters will at least sleep knowing the custodian role is secured.

The hour belongs to New South Wales though and in particular, courageous coach Fittler. He refused to be boxed in by tradition, convention or common-thinking. He is his own man. And it paid off, not only for him but for a state so desperate for Origin success. So popular is his style, ANZ enjoyed a rare sellout.

This series win meant so much to the New South Wales faithful not just because it was a win. It meant so much because it was a win achieved with class, style and the right amount of flamboyance. He has just one series victory but already Fittler can be considered one of the most important mentors in Blues Origin history.