Sports quiz of the week: League Cup final, Winter Olympics and a great mind

p

p

Who is wasted? What did RB Leipzig build? And where is Ailsa Craig?

Arsenal are facing Manchester City at Wembley on Sunday in the League Cup final.

Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian

Manchester City are hoping to win their first trophy under Pep Guardiola on Sunday in the League Cup final. How many times has Arsène Wenger won the competition?

None Wenger has won seven FA Cups and three league titles at Arsenal but he is yet to win the League Cup.

One

Two

Three

Marit Bjorgen became the most decorated Winter Olympian of all time this week when she won her 14th medal. In which sport does she compete?

Curling

Cross-country skiing The 37-year-old Norwegian is nicknamed “the Iron Lady”.

Figure skating

Ice hockey

Wigan became only the third team to beat Manchester City this season. The other two are: Liverpool and …

Napoli

Arsenal

Shakhtar Donetsk City had already won their Champions League group by the time they lost in Ukraine.

Feyenoord

What role has Ailsa Craig played for the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang?

She designed the Olympic village

She sang the theme song Let Everyone Shine

She sings the anthems at every medal ceremony

It provided all of the curling stones Ailsa Craig is a tiny, uninhabited island in Scotland where all of the stones being used at the Pyeongchang Winter Games are mined.

Where will a 140-year-old trophy made from 270 melted silver rupees be awarded this weekend?

Pyeongchang

London

Glasgow

Edinburgh The Calcutta Cup (or, more likely, a replica) will be handed over to the England or Scotland rugby union captain at Murrayfield on Saturday.

Queen of the South goalkeeper Sam Henderson may not be fit to play against Dunfermline this weekend. How did he pick up an injury?

He dropped a phone book on to his foot

He burned his hand while tossing pancakes

He shot himself in the foot with a pellet gun

He was struck by a runaway cow Queen of the South’s assistant manager Dougie Anderson said: “Sam has missed training this week after being struck. It could have been worse as the cow ran at him for a second time but he managed to get out of the way. He has a sore shoulder so he is getting closely monitored and a lot of treatment.”

Who reacted to being rejected for a job by saying: "I’m intelligent enough. It’s not like I played on a fox and dog pitch all my life. I can’t believe some people, I’m one of the greatest minds in football and I’m being wasted because of a lack of experience or ‘maybe he talks his mind too much’"?

Mark Hughes

Craig Bellamy

Paolo Di Canio

Sol Campbell Campbell had applied to be manager of Oxford United, a job that was given to Craig Bellamy.

What did RB Leipzig build in their stadium before Napoli's visit for a Europa League match this week?

A lifesize statue of Napoli legend Diego Maradona

A 100-foot high can of Red Bull for fans to drink at half-time

A smoking area in the away dressing room for Napoli coach Maurizio Sarri “Sarri is a passionate smoker,” said Napoli star Marek Hamsik recently. “I have never seen anyone who smokes so much. Thank God he has to hold back during games.”

A pizza the size of the centre circle to feed the away fans before the game

Which country tripled its all-time total of Winter Olympics medals in one day this week?

New Zealand New Zealand hadn’t won a medal since 1992 until 16-year-olds Zoi Sadowski-Synnott and Nico Porteous won a bronze medal each on Thursday afternoon.

Ireland

Portugal

Spain

Darya Domracheva won her fourth Winter Olympic gold medal this week. What did the biathlete from Belarus do for work four years ago?

She was a TV presenter at the Winter Olympics in Sochi

She worked for the KGB Domracheva is married to Ole Einar Bjørndalen, the most successful biathlete of all time.

She was a stunt woman in the Fast and Furious films

She was a professional boxer who fought (and beat) Nicola Adams

You got…

Challenge your friends