Sports quiz of the week: Anthony Joshua, Australian Open and worms

p

p

Who spat out a wriggler? Who screamed? And who showed up?

This may or may not be a clue.

Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images

Wales played 40 friendlies between Ryan Giggs making his Wales debut in 1991 and his retirement from international football in 2007. In how many of them did Giggs play?

None

10 Giggs isn’t the only one to have missed a few friendlies. Gareth Bale has been on for the pitch for just 26 minutes in Wales’ last seven friendly matches.

20

30

Who said: “I didn’t actually eat the worms. It was a bit of banter I used to have. You get a nice, big juicy worm hanging out of your mouth. It wobbles, wriggling around. You look as if you’re chewing it but then spit it out"?

Ronnie O’Sullivan

Neymar

Sean Dyche Dyche made the unusual denial after his former team-mate, Soren Andersen, had speculated that the Burnley manager may have developed his gravelly voice by eating worms. “He had exactly the same voice when he was younger,” said Andersen. “Maybe the voice comes from eating earthworms, because every time we trained, he used to eat worms. He did, and it was horrible, I’ve never experienced anything like it. It was like: ‘Whoops, there’s an earthworm’ and then he ate it."

Eric Cantona

How many Chelsea players were booked for diving in their FA Cup tie against Norwich City?

One

Two

Three Pedro, Willian and Álvaro Morata were all shown yellow cards for simulation. The referee did not give Chelsea a penalty during the match but they did go through on penalties.

Four

Anthony Joshua and Joseph Parker – two unbeaten heavyweight champions – have agreed to fight in Cardiff on 31 March. Which British boxer did Parker defeat in his last fight?

Tyson Fury

David Haye

Dereck Chisora

Tony Bellew

Hughie Fury Parker won a majority decision after a scrappy fight in Manchester last year.

Who said: “Whether I was 15th or 50th choice, it didn’t matter to me one bit”?

Joseph Parker

Ryan Giggs

Paul Lambert Lambert was speaking at his unveiling as Stoke City manager, a job that had reportedly been turned down by Gary Rowett, Quique Sanchez Flores and Martin O'Neill.

Peter Crouch

What did 15-year-old Marta Kostyuk achieve this week?

She became the youngest player to beat a top seed at a Grand Slam

She became the first women’s footballer to be signed for a fee of over £1m

She reached the third round of the Australian Open Kostyuk is the youngest woman to reach the third round of a Grand Slam in 21 years. “I didn’t feel like she was 15 at all,” said Olivia Rogowska, who lost to Kostyuk in the second round.

She became the youngest UFC champion ever

Which European club remains unbeaten in their league this season?

Galatasaray

Juventus

Coleraine

Paris Saint-Germain

Barcelona Barcelona lost to local rivals Espanyol in the Copa del Rey on Wednesday night but they remain unbeaten in La Liga.

Who responded to defeat by saying: “I had to show up. If I was a football player I would have missed this game”?

Mathieu Bastareaud

James Haskell

LeBron James

Ronnie O’Sullivan O’Sullivan, the defending champion, was speaking after losing to Mark Allen in the quarter-finals of the Masters at Alexandra Palace.

Who earned £29m while "on holiday for seven months"?

Neymar

Carlo Ancelotti

Carlos Tevez Speaking about his stint as the highest paid player in the world at Shanghai Shenhua, where he scored four goals in 20 appearances, Tevez said: "I was on holiday for seven months in China. It's fine for the Shanghai coach and president to criticise me. I didn't know what I was doing there. I was not in a position to give 100%!"(MISSING)

José Mourinho

What did Kevin Durant ask of LeBron James this week?

To be his VP if he runs for President in 2024

To present the Oscars with him

To join Common Goal, the charitable initiative set up by Juan Mata

To sort out the showers at The Q, the Cleveland Cavaliers' home ground There was no hot water in the showers in the away dressing room when the Golden State Warriors visited. Players were heard screaming in discomfort, with Durant yelling: "Man, they got to do something in The Q. Somebody call Bron!"

You got…

Challenge your friends