Tour de France diary: Football wins and Cavendish keeps pain to himself

Our correspondent experiences Tour atmosphere turning ugly and the mayor of Mende overstepping the mark with his buffet

Mark Cavendish crosses the line in La Rosière but too late to avoid elimination.

Photograph: Marco Bertorello/AFP/Getty Images

Sunday

It’s a super Sunday for French sports fans. The cobbled roads of the Hell of the North are a mere mise en bouche for the plat du jour, the World Cup final. After the race the TVs in the press room are tuned to Moscow and the Tour is forgotten. We join the autoroute and head towards the Alps among a convoy of beeping, tooting, tricolour-bearing, cars, camper vans and trucks.

Monday

A mere 800km later Annecy welcomes the Tour. Some head for the lake but we drive to Aix-les-Bains for a press conference announcing a rare thing: a big budget, high-profile women’s team, led by the former world champion Lizzie Deignan. Six months pregnant, she stays on to talk to the exclusively male media about her new sponsor and racing after motherhood.

Tuesday

The French rider Julian Alaphilippe steals away to take the first home win of 2018. But the Tour’s token women’s race, La Course, bolted on to the men’s route, steals the show with Annemiek van Vleuten snatching a cliff-hanging win from Anna van der Breggen. But no sooner is La Course done than the focus switches to the men’s race. Van Vleuten is quickly bundled off-stage and is not even afforded a press conference.

Wednesday

As the sun sets behind the mountains and the wind picks up, the media awaits Mark Cavendish’s arrival at La Rosière. The 2018 Tour has been a dismal failure for him and on the brutal Alpine stage his race comes to an end. Yet instead of climbing off his bike, Cavendish continues, despite knowing that he will be eliminated. Some things don’t change though. As he reaches the line he ignores the waiting media scrum and heads straight to his hotel.

Thursday

At Alpe d’Huez, a palpable sense of dread. There are more police than ever before, more barriers, more marshals and the sale of booze is banned. But it still doesn’t prevent jostling, shoving and spitting at Chris Froome.

Friday

The Tour organisation’s appeals for calm are going unheeded, particularly by some in the French media. Libération calls Team Sky a “snake with two heads” and L’Équipe says suspicion about their riders is as “contagious as herpes”. The sledging livens up an uneventful, overcast and sultry stage finale in Valence in the Rhone valley, where a rogue fan rolls a lit flare through the peloton’s wheels as they speed past.

Saturday

After a monstrous drive through the Ardèche and Lozère we finally arrive in Mende’s mountain-top aerodrome, where the finish to stage 14 is on the runway. There is a press buffet too but, unlike every other host town on the Tour, we get charged €6. So we strike a pact to invoice the mayor for every time we type Mende. That’s Mende, Mende, Men …