BBC and Mo Farah just clear finish line in Sports Personality of the Year

I f the beauty of sport lies in its drama and its unpredictability then in the end this programme reflected it quite wonderfully. Anthony Joshua, the bookmakers’ overwhelming favourite, did not finish on the podium; Mo Farah, who considered himself so unlikely to win he did not even turn up, was crowned champion, and at his moment of glory the live feed linking his sofa in London to a packed arena in Liverpool and onwards to an astonished nation failed altogether. We witnessed a look of surprise spread across his features before the screen went blue and in his moment of glory the victor was replaced with three words, written in simple white type: signal loss detected.

The crowd, which had already stood to applaud its champion, fell silent. The camera caught some of their reactions and a smiling Joshua, who must have been mentally preparing a victory speech just a few moments earlier, did particularly well, in contrast to that blue screen, not to signal that his loss had been detected. “I think that just about sums up Mo’s evening, doesn’t it really?” said co-host Gabby Logan, as the presenters commenced the process of furiously ad-libbing their way through what should have been the climactic final moments.

The event brought a crowd of 10,000 people to the Echo Arena but beforehand talk had been mainly of who was not going to be there. Of the 12 nominees for the headline award Chris Froome was busy training in Mallorca, Lewis Hamilton was unavoidably detained in Los Angeles, Jo Konta was sitting on a sofa in London and Farah, who was supposed to be busy moving house, turned out to be on the very same sofa. It was not in his new house.

Not only did Farah not turn up, he didn’t even hire a babysitter. When he was first interviewed, long before the late drama, his two-year-old son Hussein was climbing all over him, so for a while he could not hear any questions. By the time the child had been torn away from his father’s arms Farah’s microphone had been knocked off, so once he could hear the questions nobody could hear the answers. Clare Balding, another co-host, immediately declared this “the best interview ever” which seemed an unlikely conclusion, but then this event is all about looking on the bright side.

“The BBC’s annual review of the year in sport is one of the most cheerful and event-packed of all programmes,” wrote Mary Crozier in the Guardian’s review of the 1963 version, and in the end the same was true of its latest iteration. Beyond that, however, much had changed. “Sports Review of 1963 ran through a glorious hour,” she continued. “It really is rather a wonderful way of reliving the events. They are so concentrated that wickets fall as fast as apples in a gale, tries follow on each other’s muddy heels, crowds rise and subside and rise again and roar in rhythm, and horses seem to run twice as fast as natural. At the end of this programme, one is quite breathless.”

Once compressed into a single glorious hour the programme now sprawls over more than twice that, yet for all the additional time when the highlights arrived they were propelled at Aussie-quick pace. No old-fashioned British dibbly-dobbly slow-motion sequences here.

The first three months of the year, which included men’s and women’s tennis, darts, snooker, athletics, skiing, skeleton, horse racing, American football, rugby union, rugby league, boxing and two football competitions, were covered in a minute and 31 seconds. The rest of the calendar was dealt with in similar haste, crunched through like apples caught not so much in a gale as an industrial cider press.

For all the lack of actual action and despite its scrubbed-up, scripted, somehow rather sterile presentation, this was still a largely gripping summary of the year in British sport. Some of the nominees, particularly Jonnie Peacock and Elise Christie, spoke inspiringly; Froome was asked about his failed drug test – “Quite a horrible situation, if I’m honest” – and Adam Peaty, for reasons that remain unclear, was sent to a swimming pool with a CGI lion. But the programme was also, like some of the sports it sets out to summarise, a game of two halves.

The main award is now voted for by the public, forcing programme makers to introduce the contestants as quickly as possible so they can open, and squeeze maximum benefit from, all those premium-rate phone numbers. At which point, the pace changed.

Jess Ennis-Hill was given a lifetime achievement award, her arrival on stage prefaced by an introduction from Michael Johnson, a Julie Walters-voiced video package and a cover of Beyoncé’s Halo sung by Rebecca Ferguson, who knows all about public votes having once come second in the X Factor. Even before she started her speech, more time had been devoted to Ennis-Hill than to highlights of all 12 months of the sporting year put together.

Some teams, tours and achievements got segments of their own, though Celtic somewhat sullied their moment by losing the record-smashing unbeaten record that was being honoured earlier that very day. “Sod’s law, really,” sniffed third and final co-host Gary Lineker, as yet unaware sod had not yet finished imposing his law on the evening.