Richie Porte: another year, another mishap for cycling’s unluckiest man

I n 2014, it was pneumonia. In 2016, it was an untimely puncture. In 2017, it was a horror crash at 70kph on a steep descent. On Sunday, Richie Porte’s latest attempt at the Tour de France yellow jersey was prematurely ended by an innocuous pile-up early on stage nine which left the Tasmanian clutching his right shoulder. The pained facial expression said it all. As tears emerged from underneath his mirrored sunglasses, it was clear that Porte’s efforts to claim the grandest prize in cycling would be undone by misfortune.

After last year’s incident, also on stage nine, Porte dedicated himself to preparing for the 105th edition of this historic sporting event. He eschewed several notable early-season races to focus on the Tour de France and things looked promising for the 2018 race.

But once more, lady luck refused to smile on him. The subsequent tweet from Porte’s wife said it all: “I hate cycling!” The Tour de France is a three-week endurance epic, one of the toughest physical challenges in elite sport. It requires riders to conquer some of the most fearsome ascents in France, not infrequently in treacherous conditions.

Stage nine had been eyed off by nervous riders for its challenging sections of cobblestone that regularly send competitors flying during the annual Paris-Roubaix classic, not known as the “hell of the north” for nothing. But the campaign of an affable, much-respected member of the peloton would be ended on a suburban street under blue skies, well before the race reached the pavé. A ready reminder that there is little fairness in sport.

If there is any silver lining to Porte’s latest misfortune, it is that collarbones heal quickly and his season may not be over yet. BMC Racing Team’s doctor Max Testa estimated late on Sunday that Porte could be back racing within six weeks; the Vuelta a España begins on 25 August, two days short of that timeframe. Porte has started the Spanish Grand Tour just once, in 2012, and would bring fresh legs to a race often contested by a tired peloton.

While triumph in Spain may be optimistic, the 2018 UCI Road World Championships in late September could be a realistic objective for the Tasmanian. After several years of sprinter-friendly courses, this edition’s route is one of the toughest in history with over 5,000 metres of climbing. With a strong Australian team around him, Porte would be among the favourites if he targets success in Innsbruck.

But while the rainbow stripes of a world championship jersey would be some achievement – Cadel Evans is currently the only Australian to have managed that feat – it is unlikely to ease the anguish of another failed attempt on the hallowed maillot jaune. Porte is now 33 and the inevitable march of time will soon pose an insurmountable obstacle to him repeating another of Evans’ triumphs, rolling along the Champs Élysées clad in yellow.

Uncertainty over BMC Racing Team’s future has reportedly precipitated a move for Porte to Trek-Segafredo for 2019, and there is no guarantee his transition will be seamless. Even if the climber is back on the Tour de France start-line in 12 months’ time, the continued rise of younger stars such as Egan Bernal and the Yates brothers means that Porte’s favourite tag will not hold forever.

If the Australian wins the 2019 Tour, he would be the oldest yellow jersey holder in the race’s post-second world war history. He would take that record from Evans, a rider who suffered his own bad luck at Le Tour only to overcome adversity in 2011 and seize the biggest victory in the history of Australian cycling. But unless Porte has better fortune next year, he might instead be remembered as cycling’s unluckiest rider.