Sports quiz of the week: El Clásico, Ashes thrashings and Bristol City beverages

p

p

Who won in Canada? Who is feeling relaxed? And who gulped down some red?

p The big sports quiz of the year 2017

Bristol City players Bobby Reid and Korey Smith enjoy beating Manchester United in the League Cup quarter-finals.

Photograph: David Klein/Reuters

What was Wayne Rooney talking about when he said: "We actually don’t even talk about football in there. It’s a refreshing place to go and it’s relaxing"?

The players’ bar at Goodison Park

The Everton dressing room under Sam Allardyce

The trophy room in his house

The garden centre where he is doing community service Rooney was ordered to do 100 hours of community service after he was caught drink driving.

Who went to Laval and secured a 26th successive win?

Real Madrid

Celtic

Steve Smith

Billy Joe Saunders Saunders went to Laval to fight – and beat – Canadian boxer David Lemieux on Saturday night. Laval is not a hotbed for boxing fans but the venue is eight miles away from Lemieux’s house.

Complete the sequence of Premier League teams: Watford, Stoke City, Crystal Palace ...

Arsenal

Manchester United The four top-flight sides Bristol City have beaten on their way to the League Cup semi-finals.

Chelsea

Liverpool

Who enjoyed a glass of £450-a-bottle Barca Velha red wine?

José Mourinho

Álvaro Morata

Zlatan Ibrahimovic

The Bristol City goalkeeping coach Bristol City 's manager, Lee Johnson, had bought the wine to give to José Mourinho but didn't have a chance to present it to the United manager after their League Cup quarter-final “To be honest, they shot off," said Johnson after the game. "I had a go at my goalie coach, I saw him having a glass.”

It’s el Clásico this weekend. Who is the last Real Madrid player to have scored a hat-trick against Barcelona in La Liga (in 1995)?

Romário

Iván Zamorano Real Madrid won 5-0, with three goals from Iván Zamorano, one from José Amavisca and one from Luis Enrique.

Raúl

Michael Laudrup

Real Madrid have won five trophies this year. Which of these did they not win?

La Liga

Champions League

Copa del Rey Barcelona won that one.

Uefa Super Cup

Spanish Super Cup

Fifa Club World Cup

In which sport did a 63-year-old defeat a former world champion?

Boxing

Snooker

Darts Paul Lim rolled back the years at Alexandra Palace on Monday when he pulled off a sensational first-round victory over former BDO world champion Mark Webster.

MMA

When asked about his job, who said: “I think our performances have been pretty good over the past couple of years.It’s for people above my pay grade to make that decision, so we’ll leave it up to them”?

Mark Hughes

Paul Clement

Trevor Bayliss The England cricket coach was speaking right after his team had surrendered the Ashes.

Arsène Wenger

Liverpool and Arsenal are meeting on a Friday night for the first time in 28 years. What was the score in that match?

Liverpool 4-3 Arsenal

Livepool 0-2 Arsenal What a night.

Arsenal 2-1 Liverpool

Liverpool 0-6 Arsenal

Australia are on course to whitewash England in the Ashes for the second time in a row down under. When did England last beat Australia 5-0?

2005

1985

1961

England have never beaten Australia 5-0 Australia also won the 2006–07 series 5-0.

You got…

Challenge your friends