Sports quiz of the week: World Cup losers, Ashes winners and a promise

p

p

Who kept a promise? Why is a surfer owed a beer? Where next for rugby?

p Try our quizzes from previous weeks

This week has been kind on some and brutal on others.

Photograph: Mike Hewitt/Getty Images

Which country lost to France on Friday, to Australia on Saturday and to Ireland on Sunday?

New Zealand

Wales France beat them at football on Friday. Australia beat them at rugby union on Saturday. And Ireland beat them at rugby league on Sunday.

Scotland

Papua New Guinea

At which stage have Italy been knocked out at the last two World Cups, in 2010 and 2014?

The group stage Italy have won just one match at the last two World Cups – and that was against England.

The last-16 stage

The quarter-finals

The semi-finals

The final

Six countries have qualified for the last seven World Cups (going back to 1994): Brazil, Germany, Argentina, Spain, Mexico and …

Croatia

Sweden

England

South Korea Mexico have qualified for 16 World Cups but have never made it past the quarter-finals. Uruguay have only qualified 13 times but they have won it twice.

What did Red Sox outfielder Mookie Betts achieve this week?

He was in the Peru team that qualified for the World Cup

He hit a perfect 300 in the World Series of Bowling Betts has practised every day of the offseason so not to be out of his element, Donny.

He ran 100m in less than 10 seconds at the US Olympic trials

He hit a century break at the Shanghai Masters

Which team has won the most Ashes series since England and Australia started playing each other 135 years ago?

England

Australia

They are tied Australia and England have won 32 series each, with five series ending in draws.

If it was France in 2007, New Zealand in 2011 and England in 2015, where will it be in 2023?

Qatar

South Africa

France The Rugby World Cup is going back to France, much to the chagrin of Ireland and South Africa.

Ireland

Why does Charlie Fry owe professional surfer Mick Fanning a beer?

Fry, an Olympic sailor, was going the wrong way in a race until the surfer told him to turn around

Fry qualified for Australia's Olympic skiing squad after taking balance lessons from Fanning

Fry escaped from a shark attack by using Fanning’s technique of "punching it in the nose" Fry said of his escape: “I said to myself: ‘Just do what Mick did, just punch it in the nose.’ If you are watching or listening, Mick, I owe you a beer, thank you very much. I thought it was a friend goofing around. I turned and I saw this shark come out of the water and breach its head. I punched it in the face with my left hand and managed to scramble back on my board. Luckily a wave came, so I just surfed the wave in.”

Fry took up skateboarding because he “could never beat Mick in the sea” and now he is a world champion

Which of these players became his country’s all-time leading goalscorer this week?

Christian Eriksen

Mile Jedinak

Nicklas Bendtner

Romelu Lukaku Lukaku, who is only 24, scored his 31st goal for Belgium against Japan, overtaking Bernard Voorhoof and Paul van Himst.

What promise did Pedro Pablo Kuczynski keep this week?

He walked for 50 miles with no shoes on

He sold a football club

He gave everyone a day off work and school Kuczynski, the president of Peru, had promised a national holiday if the country's football team made it to the World Cup.

He collected an award in his pants

What did lawyers have to explain to a court in New York this week?

That the Pittsburgh Penguins are not really birds

That the Dallas Cowboys are not really cowboys

That the Red Sox are not pieces of clothing

What football and Fifa are Both prosecutors and defence lawyers were at pains to explain to the court the significance of Fifa and football. "It [Fifa] is kind of like the NFL or Major League Baseball but it’s for soccer all around the world,” said assistant US attorney Keith Edelman. "Here and around the world soccer is more than just a sport. It’s a passion, a way of life."

You got…

Challenge your friends