Eoin Morgan admits Ben Stokes’ return gives him difficult decision

• All-rounder fit to face India in Bristol after injury lay-off

• Alex Hales’ form ‘makes him a very strong case’, says captain

Ben Stokes bowls during a nets session in Manchester.

Photograph: Martin Rickett/PA

Victory in Cardiff on Friday means a showdown in Bristol to decide the outcome of a T20 series that has been so much more intriguing than those games against Australia. There is more needle and more quality in these matches and consequently they are a much better spectacle.

Even the pre-match deliberations of the England set-up are interesting. There is a big selection dilemma to resolve before the match gets under way at 2pm on Sunday. Ben Stokes is fit to play; England will be eager to rehabilitate him after another enforced absence but it is unclear how they might to do it.

Eoin Morgan was suitably candid in Cardiff when asked whether he knew who would play in Bristol. “No. It’s not clear,” he said. “It’s a difficult decision to make but we will do whatever is right for the betterment of the team.”

There was an assumption that Alex Hales would give way yet he was the man who calmly guided England home. “That makes him a very strong case for Bristol,” said Morgan.

They could leave Joe Root out for Sunday’s game. They might fudge the issue by replacing Jake Ball with Stokes but the reason why everyone wants Stokes there is to give the captain plenty of options. It would certainly seem perverse to drop Hales just now.

Hales understands the situation and does not know whether he will play. “I have no answer,” he said. “I’m doing all I can to score runs and keep putting pressure on the guys who know they’re playing.

“We will have to see. If it’s me that’s left out, you look at the guys who are playing ahead of me and what can you do? It’s up to me to keep training hard, being positive and to have a decent mindset.

“It’s funny how quickly things can change. This is what Jonny [Bairstow] did for three years. Every time that he got a chance he delivered and he has now made four hundreds in six games.”

Morgan admitted that England’s batting lineup and order is a work in progress and he hinted that they have not found the ideal solution yet. It does feel that England are not playing to their strengths by having Hales down the order, despite his success in Cardiff.

The Spin: sign up and get our weekly cricket email.

The elevation of Jos Buttler is triggered by performances in the IPL rather than any deficiencies in England’s previous lineup; this experiment may not last long, especially since Morgan is keen to be flexible so far from the next World Cup, in 2020.

Hales is not in a position to dictate where he bats. He merely points out his eagerness to open if possible. “That’s where I enjoy batting and that’s what I’ve done my whole career. But if I’m at three, four or five it’s a role I’m happy to take on and to learn new things.”

At the moment he is happy just to play. “The batting lineup is that strong. You look how well Jos is playing. He’s batting on a different planet. Just to be part of this lineup anywhere is a great effort.”

Well, the competition at the moment is healthy and productive and Hales is back in the mix after being tormented by Kuldeep Yadav at Old Trafford. After that game he had a few harsh words with himself and he found a way.

“I had never faced him before,” explained Hales‚ “and didn’t know much about him. Maybe I just went out at Manchester without a plan and I couldn’t get going.

“I watched a bit more footage, worked with Merlyn and looked to play a bit more off the back foot and waited for him to float one up; then I hit a bit straighter.”

This plan worked well at Cardiff. The assumption is that he will have another opportunity to put it into practice on Sunday afternoon.