England Women start international season boosted by 40%!p(MISSING)ay rise

p

• Heather Knight’s side reap rewards of last year’s World Cup win

• Team begin their summer against South Africa on Saturday

England celebrate their Women’s World Cup triumph at Lord’s last year.

Photograph: Harry Trump/IDI via Getty Images

The England cricketers who held the Women’s World Cup aloft at Lord’s last year have received a healthy pay rise, it has been revealed as their international season begins on Saturday against South Africa at Worcester.

Clare Connor, the director of women’s cricket at the England and Wales Cricket Board, announced the overall salary pot for Heather Knight’s side increased by 40%!i(MISSING)n February, with 10 of the best-performing contracted players receiving upgrades on existing deals of more than 50%!
(MISSING)
“The objective is to get to a situation in 2020 – when the new investment in the game kicks in – whereby the players are paid double what they were paid when they won the World Cup,” she said. “We have also introduced a bonus pot for series wins.”

There will be several changes to England’s starting team for a summer that begins with three one-day internationals with the Proteas, continues with a T20 tri-series where New Zealand are also welcomed, and concludes with three ODIs against the White Ferns in July.

The biggest surprise is the omission of the 24-year-old spinner Alex Hartley, overlooked in favour of fellow young left-armer Sophie Ecclestone and the veteran off-spinners Danielle Hazell and Laura Marsh.

Mark Robinson, the England coach, said Hartley’s confidence and form suffered after her impressive World Cup. “She hasn’t quite been herself and probably needs a little bit of time out of the firing line at a time when others have bowled really well,” he said. “She had an incredible rise and has hit a few bumps, which happens to everybody.”

Katherine Brunt returns to the 50-over team defeated 2-1 by India in April. The fast bowler was rested from that trip along with Sarah Taylor, who is back behind the stumps. The opener Lauren Winfield has also won a reprieve, given the last batting spot in the squad ahead of Fran Wilson, another dropped World Cup winner.

While England’s main goal for 2018 is adding the World T20 trophy to the cabinet in November, they are playing for ICC Women’s Championship points against the much-improved South Africa team in the these ODIs. They last met in a World Cup semi-final when the hosts prevailed with two balls to spare in the match of the tournament.

The Spin: sign up and get our weekly cricket email.