Laura Muir sticks to 1500m as GB women outnumber men in Euro squad

Muir resists urge to attempt audacious 800m/1500m double Dina Asher-Smith will run in both 100m and 200m

Laura Muir suffered irritation to an achilles tendon after the Anniversary Games in London.

Photograph: Martin Cole/ProSports/REX/Shutterstock

Laura Muir has resisted the urge to create history by attempting the 800m and 1500m double at next month’s European Championships after she suffered an achilles niggle at the weekend. As a result the 25-year-old, who was a double world indoor medallist earlier this year, will only run the 1500m in Berlin.

UK Athletics performance director Neil Black said the decision was taken by Muir, who had hoped to be the first woman to do the middle distance double at the Europeans, on Monday night after the 102-strong British squad had been selected.

“Laura had a genuine intention to create history and do the double,” he added. “She’s a massively competitive athlete, but she has some achilles irritation and so she’s made the decision to focus on the 1500. It is disappointing. But I love the fact she makes good decisions and I’m sure we’ll see her at her best in Berlin.”

Sign up to The Recap, our weekly email of editors’ picks.

As a result Adelle Tracey is awarded the third place in the 800m, alongside Lynsey Sharpe and Shelayna Oskan-Clarke.

Black insisted he was most excited about the prospect of Dina Asher-Smith, the British record holder over 100m and 200m, going for a treble gold in both events and the 4x100m relay. “She is definitely capable of winning three gold medals,” said Black. “I know she is amazingly determined. She is up there with the best in the world and we certainly have high expectations - but her own personal expectations are the highest of all.”

Muir and Asher-Smith are the standout names in the 102-strong British squad, which is largest for more than 100 years. For the first time ever at a major championships there are also more women (56) selected than men (46) in the squad.

MEN

100m Zharnel Hughes, Reece Prescod, CJ Ujah

200m Adam Gemili, Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake, Delano Williams

400m Dwayne Cowan, Matthew Hudson-Smith, Martyn Rooney, Rabah Yousif

800m Elliot Giles, Guy Learmonth, Daniel Rowden

1500m Charles Da’Vall Grice, Chris O’Hare, Jake Wightman

5000m Ben Connor, Marc Scott, Chris Thompson

10,000m Chris Thompson, Andy Vernon, Alex Yee

3000m Steeplechase Jamaine Coleman, Zak Seddon, Ieuan Thomas

110m Hurdles David King, Andrew Pozzi

400m Hurdles Jack Green, Dai Greene, Sebastian Rodger

High Jump Chris Baker, Allan Smith, David Smith

Pole Vault Adam Hague, Charlie Myers

Long Jump Dan Bramble, Feron Sayers

Triple Jump Nathan Douglas

Hammer Chris Bennett, Nick Miller

Decathlon Tim Duckworth

4x100m Relay Harry Aikines-Aryeetey, Ojie Edoburun, Adam Gemili, Zharnel Hughes, Nethaneel Mitchell-Blake, CJ Ujah

4x400m Relay Cameron Chalmers, Dwayne Cowan, Jack Green, Matthew Hudson-Smith, Sebastian Rodger, Martyn Rooney, Owen Smith, Delano Williams, Rabah Yousif

20km Race Walk Tom Bosworth, Callum Wilkinson

WOMEN

100m Dina Asher-Smith, Imani-Lara Lansiquot, Daryll Neita

200m Dina Asher-Smith, Beth Dobbin, Bianca Williams, Jodie Williams

400m Amy Allcock, Laviai Nielsen, Anyika Onuora

800m Shelayna Oskan-Clarke, Lynsey Sharp, Adelle Tracey

1500m Laura Muir, Jemma Reekie, Laura Weightman

5000m Melissa Courtney, Eilish McColgan, Steph Twell

10,000m Charlotte Arter, Alice Wright

3000m Steeplechase Rosie Clarke

400m Hurdles Meghan Beesley, Eilidh Doyle, Kirsten McAslan

High Jump Morgan Lake, Nikki Manson

Pole Vault Holly Bradshaw, Lucy Bryan, Molly Caudery

Long Jump Shara Proctor, Jazmin Sawyers, Lorraine Ugen

Triple Jump Naomi Ogbeta

Shot Put Sophie McKinna, Divine Oladipo, Amelia Strickler

Discus Eden Francis, Jade Lally, Kirsty Law

Hammer Sophie Hitchon

Heptathlon Katarina Johnson-Thompson

4x100m Relay Dina Asher-Smith, Shannon Hylton, Imani-Lara Lansiquot, Daryll Neita, Ashleigh Nelson, Asha Philip, Bianca Williams

4x400m Relay Mary Abichi, Finette Agyapong, Amy Allcock, Meghan Beesley, Zoe Clark, Emily Diamond, Eilidh Doyle, Kirsten McAslan, Laviai Nielsen, Anyika Onuora

20km Race Walk Gemma Bridge, Bethan Davies, Heather Lewis

Marathon Tracy Barlow, Caryl Jones, Lily Partridge, Charlotte Purdue, Sonia Samuels

Black refused to set a medal target for the British team, but insisted: “This is a huge opportunity for athletes to demonstrate form ahead of two global championship summers.

“It is fantastic that for the first time ever more women than men have been selected and this underlines further that athletics is a truly equal sport. The team is our largest for over 100 years and we look forward to watching them thrive under the spotlight of a major championships. These European Championships are an important marker on the road to the Tokyo 2020 Olympics and we expect to be competing for medals at every turn.”

The championships take place at Berlin’s Olympic Stadium from 7 to 12 August.