IAAF can learn from the Highland games

p

Letters from and

Tom McNabClaire Chandy

Jamaica’s Shericka Jackson wins the women’s 200m as Jenna Prandini of the US finishes second in the Athletics World Cup at the London Stadium on Sunday 15 July 2018.

Photograph: Matthew Childs/Reuters

The Athletics World Cup defied its critics (USA coast to win but Lake gives London crowd reason for cheer, 16 July). It was enjoyed by an enthusiastic crowd of about 25,000, and my impression was of a well-presented and well-received event. That said, had it been held outside our beloved Olympic Park, I doubt it would have drawn more than 5,000 spectators. Lord Coe is quoted as saying: “I want new things to be tried.” But “new” has no value in itself; “new” is merely “new”. So let me suggest to him something radical, but something old.

The Highland games are an expression of athletics that draw 1.5 million spectators a year, more than all IAAF events put together. Why do they draw whole families in droves, all over the world? Because they are a rich, day-long festival of athletics, piping and dancing, going back to the very heart and soul of our sport. They are the culture that Americans credit with the creation of track and field athletics in east coast universities in the final years of the 19th century.

So why not an IAAF World Highland Games Cup, featuring both men and women, with regional qualifying meetings? And prior to each Games, why not remember that athletics is supposed to be a joyous experience and offer competitions for the family in long-forgotten events like the sack race and the three-legged race? Thus the old becomes the new, athletics rediscovers its roots and starts to flower again.

Tom McNab

St Albans, Hertfordshire

• Sean Ingle (Track and failed?, 16 July) notes that the presentation of track and field has to change in the stadium. I am a member of the British Athletics Supporters Club and am lucky enough to have gone to several championship events over the last 30 years, but the stadium experience has deteriorated in that time. Sport is accompanied by very loud music, and I have seen small children upset by this and trying to protect their ears. Even worse is the infantilising treatment of the crowd by stadium presenters. We are urged to scream, to perform the Mexican wave, to kiss the person next to us and the athletes are presented to the crowd in a deeply patronising manner. It sometimes seems better to stay away and catch the action on Eurosport.

Claire Chandy

Bristol

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters