Sports quiz of the week: World Cup debutants, caps, dogs and Harrys

p

p

Who broke a record? Who is going to Russia? And who barked twice?

• Test your knowledge in previous quizzes

A new set of fans celebrate qualifying for a World Cup.

Photograph: Rodrigo Arangua/AFP/Getty Images

Three players called Harry started for England against Lithuania on Sunday (Kane, Winks and Maguire). Which Harry has the most caps for England?

Harry Hibbs Hibbs made his England debut in a 6-0 win over Wales in 1929. He won his last cap seven years later in another game against Wales but this time England lost 2-1.

Harry Bedford

Harry Allen

Harry Kane

Lewis Hamilton’s fourth F1 title is all but in the bag after his victory at the Japanese Grand Prix. Only four other drivers have won four or more titles: Alain Prost, Juan Manuel Fangio, Michael Schumacher and …

Sebastian Vettel Stewart, Lauda and Senna won three.

Jackie Stewart

Ayrton Senna

Niki Lauda

Which Spurs player became his country’s most capped footballer ever this week?

Jan Vertonghen Vertonghen, who is only 30, made his 97th appearance for Belgium in their World Cup qualifier against Cyprus.

Toby Alderweireld

Hugo Lloris

Son Heung-min

Who accepted a job after taking advice from his dog?

Harry Redknapp

Maria Sharapova

Rafa Nadal

Jupp Heynckes The new Bayern Munich coach said: "My daughter and my wife advised me on my decision, then my dog Cando barked twice and the deal was sealed."

Gordon Strachan took charge of Scotland for seven games this year. How many of them did they lose?

Seven

Five

Two

None Scotland won four and drew three of Strachan’s final games in charge. But they didn’t make it to the World Cup, so he has stepped aside.

What tactics did Venezuela coach Rafael Dudamel accuse Paraguayans of using before their World Cup qualifier in Asunción?

That the hotel chef tried to make his players sick with a dodgy lasagne

That taxi drivers drove around their hotel tooting their horns all night

That women were sent to their team hotel to “distract” his players Dudamel said: "There were several women visits last night at the hotel but football players have changed. We were not surprised by these female visits, I do not know who sent them. These are old strategies."

That their Paraguay Airlines flight was purposefully delayed to disrupt preparations

Which 49-year-old former England player will be turning out for Welsh fourth-tier team Caerau this week if the club can sort out international clearance?

Paul Gascoigne

Paul Ince

Paul Parker

Paul Merson When asked about Merson’s return to the game in a press conference this week, Arsène Wenger said: "I only speak about professional football here."

Iceland have become the country with the smallest population to reach a World Cup. Who are the second smallest country to have played in the finals?

Slovenia

Jamaica

Trinidad and Tobago When Trinidad and Tobago qualified for the 2006 World Cup their population was 1.3 million, about a million more than Iceland.

Northern Ireland

Why did the English Karate Federation have to spend an unexpected £27,310 this week?

They had to pay compensation after one of their fighters used the crane kick from Karate Kid, which had been trademarked by the film’s director

They had to book new flights to the Junior World Championships after Monarch Airlines went bust The federation secured new flights after "a fraught few days of internet searches".

They were fined after they "forgot" to enter a junior team in the Karate World Championships

The world governing body discovered half of their team was from Wales

Since the tournament began in 1930, every World Cup has featured a new team. Which two sides will be making their debuts in 2018? Iceland and ...

Qatar

Saudi Arabia

Panama Panama president Juan Carlos Varela declared Wednesday a public holiday to celebrate the team’s achievement.

Venezuela

How did Leicester City striker Ahmed Musa expand his business empire during the international break?

He opened a second petrol station in Nigeria Musa has now opened as many petrol stations as he has scored goals for Leicester (two goals in 18 games). Musa said: "We will not play forever and the best time to start thinking about that and doing something about it is when you are still playing."

He graduated from De Montfort with a BA in fine art

He exhibited his new line of women's dresses at Paris Fashion Week

He earned a place in the Guinness World Records by helping to complete a 1,000,000-piece jigsaw puzzle

According to former Mike Ditka, who played and coached both the Dallas Cowboys and the Chicago Bears, what has not existed in the US for the last 100 years?

Space travel

Oppression “All of a sudden, it’s become a big deal now, about oppression," said Ditka. "There has been no oppression in the last 100 years that I know of. Now maybe I’m not watching it as carefully as other people. I think the opportunity is there for everybody."

Global warming

Drugs

You got…

Challenge your friends