David Leadbetter’s guide to how players can tame Carnoustie

“The course is so firm and fast it reminds me of when Tiger [Woods] won at Hoylake in 2006. Dustin Johnson hit a 450-yard tee-shot the other day and players might as well take advantage of their length. You would rather carry it 300 yards over the trouble and take a wedge from the rough than taking a six iron from the fairway into some of these greens so, for somebody like Rory [McIlroy], he’s going to use the driver 10 or 11 times a round. Other players will want to focus on keeping the ball in the fairway. I just spoke to Kyle Stanley, who hit a couple of drivers down the last hole in practice but he already knows he’ll be hitting four or five irons off the tee this week. It is a case of knowing your strengths and playing to them.”

“Some of the Europeans like Tommy Fleetwood and Jon Rahm may have an advantage because these greens are considerably slower than in America. In terms of the stimpmeter, the greens at Augusta are between 12 and 14 but here I very much doubt they are going to get over 10. It takes a very different mind-set really to hit your putts and it’s noticeable how many players are coming up short during practice. We know Rory has a tendency to hit a lot of putts past the hole in America so I think the pace could suit him whereas Tiger seems to get really annoyed by slow greens and these are a little bit slower than a lot of the Open courses of the past few years.”

“When [Phil] Mickelson won in 2013, Muirfield was very, very dry. The experienced players will know what to expect whereas some of the younger players like Justin Thomas have not quite got that same knowledge of playing here. Not that he has been mentioned but I think Sergio [García] might have a good chance. This course owes him. He is a superb ball-striker and knows his way around a links course. He is so comfortable that he played his first practice round only on Tuesday. You only have to look through the list of past winners here to see that they’ve been very high calibre. I doubt if we are going to get somebody never heard of coming out of the pack to win at Carnoustie.”

“In America it is a numbers game: ‘It is 165 yards. We are going to hit an eight iron.’ That is it. Here it is 165 yards and you can hit four different types of shot with four different clubs. You have to be a very versatile player on any links course, especially this one. These young players today are very brave and very aggressive. It is the really creative players who come out on top. I think it is a course that Tiger could really do well on. It will bring his creative juices out and we have to remember he has an unbelievable short game. If you look at his results over the past few months, he has got better and better which is good to see and feels he could win, so let’s see.”

“You are going to get some good bounces and going to get some bad bounces. The bunkers are very tough and, if you are close to the lip, it is virtually impossible to extricate yourself without playing sideways. That is links golf and the players are going to have to accept that. Tom Watson’s tremendous win here in 1975 showed how to apply patience when you have to. On the par-three 16th, which was basically a par-four for him, he made five bogeys including the playoff hole but it didn’t deter him. It is keeping the big numbers off your card and turning a disaster into a bogey rather than having a triple or a quad because I am sure there will be plenty of those this week, even if the wind is fairly benign.”