Rafael Nadal still sees Novak Djokovic as main contender amid pretenders

F or all the inclination in some quarters to park Novak Djokovic in the past, given his slow recovery from injury, the rival who has played him most, Rafael Nadal, refuses to join the clamour.

While the sans-culottes might be baying at the castle walls in Paris – Kyle Edmund and Cam Norrie under the British flag, alongside Alexander Zverev, Denis Shapovalov, Dominic Thiem, a wounded Nick Kyrgios and a handful of others – there is no strong evidence to suggest the 117th staging of the French Open will witness the total collapse of the ancient regime.

“Novak is one of the best players in the history of this sport,” Nadal said on Friday as he prepares his bid to win an 11th title at Roland Garros.

Their names fell on opposite sides of the draw on Thursday, so a 52nd meeting could happen only in the final, a collision that might require Nadal to get past Marin Cilic or Juan Martín del Potro (who is carrying a groin strain), while Djokovic has potential obstacles of varying difficulty in Grigor Dimitrov, Kyrgios and Zverev, who is seeded second in the absence of Roger Federer.

Nadal starts against the eccentric Ukrainian hitter, Alexandr Dolgopolov, while Djokovic has drawn a qualifier, Rogério Dutra Silva, a battler who has toiled with minor distinction, mainly on South American clay, for 16 years and is ranked 132 in the world.

Asked if he thought Djokovic could get back to his best, Nadal said: “My answer is he’s not coming back; he’s there always. Sometimes when you come back from injuries [it] is difficult to play that well from the beginning. But he played a great event in Rome and is no doubt one of the candidates to win here.“

In Rome the Serb gave Nadal a high-level examination in two close sets in the semi-final of the Italian Open, which might have taken a slight edge off the Spaniard in the final, where he flirted with defeat before outlasting Zverev, the game’s rising star.

The semi-final – and the tournament – was almost the perfect preparation for old friends whose first meeting was here in 2006, when Djokovic retired injured after two sets of their quarter-final.

There is a good argument to be made that a refreshed and motivated Djokovic will be more dangerous here than Zverev, whose gathering aura at 21 needs the varnish of staying power for him to be a consistent threat over seven best-of-five matches in a two-week major championship.

Nadal, of course, remains the raging favourite to lift another Coupe des Mousquetaires. To suggest otherwise is to entertain madness. He has won 79 and lost only two matches at Roland Garros since his debut in 2005, when he beat the Argentinian left-hander Mariano Puerta in the final, having seen off Federer in the semis. Nadal was 19. On Sunday week he turns 32. In that span he has endured more injuries than Bryan Robson.

His views have rarely wavered. In his first recorded interview, at Monte Carlo in 2003, he batted away praise with all the certainty he brings to his famous forehand. “I’m [ranked] 100 now and I must work still a lot. Nothing comes easily. Things are very complicated and there are very good players out there.”

On Friday, 15 years, 78 titles and nearly £65m ($86m) later, he said: “It is true I had a lot of success on clay during my career but every tournament is different. We are here to try our best.”

But is it time for the new breed to make a definitive push in the majors?

“There is a generation of players with a lot of talent and great potential to become big stars. Let’s see how things happens the next couple of months … or the next couple of years.”

Edmund is on Nadal’s side of the draw and starts against the exciting young Australian wildcard, Alex de Minaur, who lit up his home major – as did Edmund, reaching the semi-final against Cilic before his hip gave up on him. Here he would have to beat Cilic in the quarters to have a shot at Nadal.

Norrie, whose Scottish blood was nurtured in New Zealand, lurks outside the top 100 and had his best career result this week when he defeated world No10 John Isner to reach the Lyon semi-final. Gilles Simon beat him on Friday to reach the final, where he will play the German Peter Gojowczyk - who meets Norrie in the first round here.