Sports quiz of the week: World Cup play-offs, Andrea Pirlo and a window cleaner

p

p

Who needs some exercise? Who is a ‘good gamble’? And who is inedible?

• Have a go at previous quizzes

Will Italy make it to the World Cup? Andrea Pirlo was in the team the last time they won it.

Photograph: Andrew Medichini/AP

Italy face a play-off to reach the 2018 World Cup. The four-times winners have only failed to qualify for one World Cup, in 1958. Who hosted it?

England

Sweden Their opponents in the play-offs this weekend.

Mexico

Brazil

Why will Scotland captain Danny Brough not be in the team when they play Samoa in their final group game at the Rugby League World Cup this weekend?

He injured himself in the shower

He was knocked out by a team-mate and didn’t pass a concussion test

He was sent home after being too drunk to board a flight Brough was one of three Scotland players sent home early.

He accepted an offer to play for their rugby union team against Samoa

Peter Shilton played 125 times for England; Paul Bastock owns a window cleaning business. But which record do they share?

They both saved three penalties in one game for Leyton Orient

They have both made 1,249 appearances in club football Bastock, a 47-year-old goalkeeper, will surpass Shilton’s record if he plays for Wisbech Town against Thetford in the FA Vase on Saturday.

They are the only British goalkeepers to have been awarded OBEs

They have gone for 10 matches at the start of a season without conceding a goal

Complete this quote from Sergio Ramos: “Real Madrid could sign Neymar but we'd have to negotiate …”?

“… who takes free-kicks and penalties“

“… a way of paying no taxes”

“… his sister's birthday” For three years in a row Neymar missed Barcelona games around 11 March, supposedly so he could go home for his sister’s birthday.

“… a sensible salary”

Celtic broke their own 100-year-old British record on Saturday by going 63 games without defeat in domestic competitions. Which side holds the European record, having gone 119 games without losing in the 1980s?

Milan

Cork City

Real Madrid

Steaua Bucharest They went three full seasons without losing – and won a 1986 European Cup in the middle of their run.

Who told whom to “get fit, you fat fuck”?

Eddie Jones to Mike Tindall

David Haye to Tony Bellew

Anthony Joshua to Tyson Fury Joshua is set to fight Deontay Wilder next year but he clearly wants a piece of Fury too.

Slaven Bilic to Andy Carroll

Chelsea’s longest-serving player, Matej Delac, has announced he is planning to leave the club after seven years of service. How many competitive matches did he make for the club?

None In fairness to Delac, he has gone on loan 10 times while with Chelsea.

Two

Four

Eight

How did Rino Gattuso compare himself with his former team-mate, Andrea Pirlo?

Like “Buckfast and Beaujolais”

Like “two brothers from different mothers”

Like a “water carrier and a fine glass of wine”

Like “Nutella and shit” “Let’s not confuse Nutella with shit,“ said Gattuso when asked about Pirlo. “When I saw him play it made me think I had to change profession. Nobody knows that better than me, because I started playing with him at Italy Under-15 level and then all the youth teams after that. It wasn’t only about his quality, but he was an animal. He had this athletic quality, which is why he played until this age. He ran so much. I played with him for about 20 years. In difficult moments, I just gave it to him. I always felt assured when I was next to him. I understood what I had to do and he was taking care of the rest.”

Which of these trophies did Pirlo not win in his playing career?

World Cup

Champions League

European Championship He came close in Euro 2012, when Italy were beaten by Spain in the final.

Coppa Italia

Serie A

Who said this about West Ham’s decision to appoint David Moyes as their new manager: “I think it’s a good gamble and I think if I was a West Ham chairman I would certainly consider David Moyes as manager, that’s for sure”?

Alex Ferguson

José Mourinho

Slaven Bilic

David Moyes "I think it's good for West Ham. I think they've got a good manager," added Moyes.

You got…

Challenge your friends