Formula One to revamp cars in hopes of boosting overtaking in 2019 season

Formula One is to adopt new aerodynamic regulations for 2019 in an attempt to increase overtaking. The FIA confirmed on Tuesday the rule changes would be implemented next season, subject to approval by the World Motor Sport council, although it is understood there was opposition from a majority of teams.

The FIA had begun investigating the difficulties in passing after this season’s opening race in Australia, where there were only five overtaking manoeuvres. The key changes are: a simplified front wing intended to direct air inward rather than outside the front wheels, reducing the turbulent air for following cars; a wider and deeper rear wing, to allow a larger wing flap and increase the effect of the DRS; simplified front brake ducts with no winglets.

“The studies indicated a likelihood of a positive impact on racing and overtaking,” the FIA said. The proposals had been discussed at the Bahrain Grand Prix but no agreement was reached, with Albert Park being notoriously difficult to pass on being cited. Nonetheless research continued, with the teams taking part.

A vote was held on Monday, the final day that regulation changes can be enforced without unanimous approval. Williams are the only team to have publicly supported the changes but it is understood Mercedes, Force India and Sauber were also in favour.

The proposals are based around the research the F1 sporting director, Ross Brawn, has conducted while planning for the major regulation change in 2021. Given the sport adopted new rules last year and is to do so again in two years, there was opposition based on maintaining the status quo for stability.

The proposals have been pushed by the FIA and F1’s owners, Liberty Media, in an effort to improve the show. The last major regulation change in 2017 made for faster cars with higher downforce but created considerable turbulent air in their wake. This reduces downforce for pursuing cars and prevents them from closing.

Lewis Hamilton is among many drivers who have been critical of the situation. After pursuing Sebastian Vettel in Australia, he said: “I couldn’t for the life of me, with all my abilities, all my tools, I just couldn’t get close enough to be in fighting range.”

Brawn described it as “an important step”, and one taken after considerable analysis. “It’s important to note that the decision has been taken after an intense period of research into the FIA’s proposals, which were made with the support of Formula One and, conducted by a majority of the teams,” he said.