Fans revel in occasion as women's State of Origin takes dazzling bow

F or nearly four decades, State of Origin has been touted as Australian sport’s greatest rivalry and few would argue. But the familiar concept of fierce interstate opposition gave way last night – not because the female version lacked punch – because 6,824 fans at North Sydney Oval found themselves united as one.

On a chilly winter’s night, thousands of mainly blue clad fans gathered at one of cricket’s hollowed grounds to witness the first ever women’s State of Origin fixture. The occasion lived up to its promise; both teams deadlocked until the final five minutes when NSW scored and claimed the inaugural trophy.

There was something strangely fitting about the history-making game being staged on a ground purposely built for another sport, without public car parking or numbered seating. The food supplies ran out by half-time, with spectators resorting to dialling for Domino pizza deliveries… but no-one seemed to care.

Sign up to receive the latest Australian sports stories every day

The importance of the game far outweighed the comfort derived from the usual conveniences that large football stadiums bring. Happy families streamed in before kick-off in droves; there were mums and sons; dads and daughters and in a complete turnaround from your regular league match, queues for food outgrew the line-up for beer three-fold.

This was something to behold. Something for sponsors and television networks to take note of. The largest growing component of the sport of rugby league finally had its stand alone moment. And it shone for all to see.

For Katrina Guyatt of Tempe in Sydney’s inner west, having grown up with a dad who played as half-back for Souths and consequently a life immersed in league, the inaugural women’s Origin was the realisation of what she’d hoped for.

“I am proud to see women’s league on the map and recognised for what it is,” said Mrs Guyatt, who attended the historic match with her sister. “There is so much talent, skill and hard hits. This is an athlete’s sport and it should be treated with the same respect as the men’s game.”

As on-field collisions could be heard from the stand and fans cheered as the two states kept levelling the score, the sound of positive sentiment rang out louder across the oval. Strangers joined in conversation, brought together under a common veil of anticipation and the feeling of being part of something to remember.

Families like the Heathwoods from the small town of Landsborough, Queensland, made the trek to Sydney having been impressed by seeing female footy broadcasted from the likes of Brisbane.

“Our boys play rugby union but we support league as well,” Kylie Heathwood explained. “I think that’s why the kids are excited; its because the women are more engaging with the kids, which you don’t sometimes get.”

Melissa and Leigh Walsh, along with children Kate and Harrison, travelled from Parkesbourne, 20km outside of Goulburn. Kate is set to switch from union to league and despite an hour’s travel each way to compete, she remains keen to pursue her dream of playing before large crowds.

“It would be so exciting to play State of Origin just to know that everyone is watching you on TV and just to see people at the ground yelling and smiling at you,” the aspiring league junior stated. “I would disagree with anyone who thinks that footy is only for boys. It is for everyone.”

It is wise advice from a sage 10-year-old and one that was unanimous among the youngest in the crowd.

Will Wilkinson, also 10 and a local Willoughby junior, is already looking forward to next year’s women’s Origin. Dressed in a Blatcheys Blue wig, he reiterated the code’s expanding appeal: “What’s good is that everyone can play, not just the guys.”

There is no argument that female interest in rugby league has spiked well beyond the traditional roles of canteen volunteers and reluctant spectators. Female presence is growing throughout the sport – from players to officials; coaches to administrators – and it’s becoming evident at an earlier age than ever before.

The excitement of eight-year-old Maci Litvensky, from Holsworthy in Sydney’s west, is resonant of the new wave of interest. Like Katrina Guyatt, Maci has been introduced to the game by her father Steve, who has held head trainer and football manager roles at the Melbourne Storm, Cronulla Sharks and currently, Mounties RLFC.

Last night, Maci was there not as her father’s daughter, but as a NSW ballgirl with the hopes of one day following in these girls’ footsteps.

“The most exciting part was when I was on TV and went on stage to get my medal for being a NSW ball girl,” Maci proudly stated. “I hope I can play Origin one day.”

Perhaps the most excited, most fulfilled woman in the stand was Joanne Studdon, mother of winning captain and NSW halfback, Maddie.

Mrs Studdon has witnessed first hand what it has taken for 23-year-old Maddie to perfect her craft from when she first laced up her boots at age four in a bid to be a part of the action so naturally enjoyed by her older brother and her dad, a Mascot JRLFC coach.

Like many of the current elite women players, Maddie played in a boys’ team until she was 12; the age limit for co-sex teams to compete. But that hasn’t been the only challenge. Maddie resigned from a high-paying job this week to be able to continue her role on the field.

“There’s the difficulty of having to combine footy with work, missing out on career advancements and having to keep asking for time off,” Mrs Studdon explained. “There’s also lots of mums between both sides who have to juggle work, getting kids to school and training.”

On the new flip side, the spoils of the women’s game are promising, with many coming off the back of a victorious and equally groundbreaking World Cup campaign for Australia last December.

“The girls have so many supporters,” Mrs Studdon reflected as she rattled off the location of fans from across the country who regularly write to Maddie. “I am so proud to think that these kids are in awe of my daughter.”

This was no more evident than later in the evening. Post presentation, players from both teams spilled onto the concourse to meet adoring fans, as nonchalant and as unrestricted as teenagers after full-time at a local junior league game.

Meanwhile, journalists worked furiously from trestle tables in the Molly Dive Stand to bring news of the historic game. One couldn’t help but think in Molly’s era – the same which saw the great Clive Churchill don the sky blue of NSW – how the notion of women’s rugby league would have been too much to fathom for an audience in the late 1940s.

It may be 70 years after Churchill and even 20 years since after the first intrastate women’s league tournament. While NSW will go into the record books as winning the inaugural women’s Origin, it can be said that this was a victory for hoards of largely untapped fans – and you can guarantee they will back up again in 2019.