Wimbledon diary: Feliciano López reveals secret of playing long game

The 36-year-old Spanish veteran is playing his 66th successive grand slam tournament

Feliciano Lopez says not making a huge effort helps.

Photograph: Gerry Penny/EPA

López’s milk bar

What is the secret to eternal life? Or, at least, the tennis equivalent: taking part in every grand slam tournament for the past 16 years? Feliciano López knows, the 36-year-old having now appeared in 66 consecutive majors since his debut at the French Open in 2002. That’s a record – one formerly belonging to Roger Federer – so when López shares his tips on a long career, you tend to listen. Even when it’s a bit weird. Take López’s diet tips, for example: “I don’t drink Coke. I don’t eat bread and I don’t drink milk.” And as for avoiding injury, the Spaniard says the secret is not to try too hard. “I don’t play many rallies. Also, I play quite easy, so I don’t make a huge effort in every single shot I play.” This sporting longevity lark sounds a doddle.

Tim still king of the hill

Of all the topics doing the rounds at the grounds, from protected seeding to slipping on court, one burns hotter than all the rest: what to call that slope out the back of Centre Court? Once known as Henman Hill, its name was changed to Murray Mount or Mound if you prefer. But with neither player here this year, shouldn’t it be called something else? “Can we have something named after a woman?” asks Lucy Cartwright, sitting on that very hill. How about Konta’s Contour, the Diary humbly suggests. “That’s awful,” says Lucy’s mum Judy. OK, how about Edmund’s Edge? Nothing. Knoll Edmund? Silence. “It will always be Henman Hill!” chips in a fiery Julie Hallwood from another picnic blanket. And that, for now, puts the matter to rest.

Sam serves up sledge

Speaking of Britain’s best hope, Johanna Konta followed up her win against Natalia Vikhlyantseva with a long press conference discussion about baked goods and an insistence she will “stay my own biggest fan”. You understand what might have prompted such a remark when you see what some Australians have to say about the player who was born in Sydney and lived in the country until she was a teenager. One such Aussie is the player Sam Groth, who holds the record for the fastest ever serve and did not hold back when talking about Konta recently on The First Serve podcast. “She’s got the strongest English accent of anyone I’ve ever heard who hasn’t lived in the country,” he said.

Tennis’s forgotten cousin, croquet

A new exhibition is designed to raise awareness of the All England Club’s forgotten cousin, croquet. Yes, the sport whose technical lexicon includes the “hong kong” (when your opponent’s ball goes out of bounds) and an “Aunt Emma” (describing a player who sets out to frustrate their opponent),The sport was the first to be played on the lawns of the All England Club in 1869, six years before the first tennis match. The story of croquet is long and glorious and nothing much happens after 1904, but suffice to say tennis gradually outgrew its original landlord. If you want to find out more and are on-site, head to the basement of the Wimbledon museum. Given that you will likely have the place to yourself, it’s also a nice place to chill out.