Sports quiz of the week: Zinedine Zidane, Mo Salah and a total bore

p

p

Who hurt himself? What was dull? Who defended his clothes?

Zinedine Zidane goes out at the top.

Photograph: Helios de la Rubia/Real Madrid via Getty Images

More than half a million people have signed a petition asking Fifa and Uefa to take action against Sergio Ramos for his performance in the Champions League final. How many fouls did the referee award against Ramos on the night?

None He did, however, award five against Sadio Mané.

One

Two

Three

Zinedine Zidane won three Champions League titles in two-and-a-half years as a manager. How many times did he win it as a player?

None

One For Real Madrid in 2002. He was a beaten finalist with Juventus in 1997 and 1998.

Two

Three

Who were the last English club to beat a Spanish club in a European final?

Fulham

Middlesbrough

Manchester United

Chelsea

Liverpool When they beat Alavés in the Uefa Cup final in 2001. Of course, since then they have lost finals to Sevilla and Real Madrid.

Kyle Edmund beat Marton Fucsovics in four sets at the French Open. What reason did Edmund give for struggling in the second set?

He lost a contact lens

He had a stitch

He was distracted by news that Zinedine Zidane had resigned

He had a paper cut on his finger Thankfully he received some treatment and survived.

What was “super-unexciting” and “the most boring ever”?

The first week of the French Open, according to Novak Djokovic

The Champions League final, according to José Mourinho

The England v Barbarians match, according to Eddie Jones

The Monaco Grand Prix, according to Lewis Hamilton Fernando Alonso agreed, calling it “probably the most boring race ever”.

Fulham are back in the Premier League. Who was their manager the last time they earned promotion to the top flight, in 2000-01, when they won 101 points and ran away with the Division 1 title?

Jean Tigana Louis Saha was their top scorer that season with 32 goals.

Roy Hodgson

Chris Coleman

Kevin Keegan

Teams from which two states have made it to the NBA finals in 2015, 2016, 2017 and now 2018?

Texas and Florida

New York and Oregon

Ohio and California The Cleveland Cavaliers and the Golden State Warriors.

Massachusetts and Oklahoma

Matt Barnes won the NBA Finals last year with the Golden State Warriors. What was unusual about his pre-match routine?

He would go to the toilet in the opposing team's shirt

He downed a shot of whiskey on the morning of the match

He smoked cannabis six hours before a game Barnes said: "I would smoke cannabis six hours before a game. We'd have a shoot-around in the morning, I'd come home and smoke a joint, take a nap, shower, eat and go and play."

He always played a song on his ukulele before going out

For which country did George Weah’s son Tim score his first international goal this week?

Libera

Libya

USA The 18-year-old was born in the US and spent his childhood between New York City and Florida.

Lesotho

76ers general manager Bryan Colangelo is under investigation for his activity on Twitter. Which one of these misdemeanours has he not been accused of doing?

Insulting his own team’s players

Insulting his predecessor

Defending the size of his collar

Threatening to punch Barack Obama in the face Colangelo denies that he sent the tweet. "Someone's out to get me, he said. "This is clearly not me."

You got…

Challenge your friends