James Sutherland to resign as Cricket Australia CEO

Cricket Australia has suffered another high-profile resignation, although James Sutherland has denied the recent ball tampering saga was behind his decision to stand down from his role as the organisation’s chief executive.

Sutherland on Wednesday announced his intention to call time on his 17-year tenure in the high-profile role as of next year, having given his long-time employers’ 12 months’ notice.

He said it was something he has been thinking about for some time, despite having indicated in the fall-out of the scandal in South Africa that he wanted to stay on in the position.

“After nearly 20 years at Cricket Australia, the time is right,” Sutherland said. “I feel very comfortable that this is the right time for me and a good time for the game.”

It has been a tumultuous past 12 months for Sutherland and CA; his resignation follows that of men’s head coach Darren Lehmann two months previously – and the suspensions of Steve Smith, David Warner and Cameron Bancroft – in the wake of the events in Cape Town.

Reviews into the cricket board and the national men’s team and its culture are underway but Sutherland denied the scandal was the catalyst for his impending exit.

“It hasn’t had a bearing on my decision,” he said. “David [Peever] and I have been talking about this for two years. It’s something I’ve been talking about for a long time.”

Sutherland’s tenure has seen plenty of highs and lows but some of his biggest achievements have also come in the past year, during which he brokered a lucrative broadcast rights deal and, after an ugly and lengthy standoff with players, a new pay deal.

“In the last 12 months we have laid key foundation stones which have included a new strategy for Australian cricket, a new memorandum of understanding with the Australian Cricketers’ Association that provides certainty for our male and female cricketers, and just recently, a new domestic broadcast rights deals that will see broader TV coverage and significant increases in revenue flowing into the game,” Sutherland said.

“With these foundations in place, I feel that it is a good time to hand over the reins to a new CEO.”

Sutherland has also overseen the introduction of the men’s and women’s Big Bash Leagues, both of which have proved hugely successful ventures and have been seen by some as revolutionising the sport. Day-night Test cricket was also introduced in Australia under his stewardship.

David Peever, chairman of CA, paid tribute, saying Sutherland had been “instrumental” in driving change in the game and strengthening it for future generations.

“The game has never been in a stronger position and we are looking forward to continuing to work with James while we conduct a search to find a suitable replacement,” said Peever.

Sutherland, 52, joined the organisation in 1998 before replacing Malcolm Speed as chief executive position in 2001. CA’s board has appointed an executive search agency, Egon Zehnder, to find the next incumbent, with Cricket Australia chief operating officer Kevin Roberts an early frontrunner.

“My successor will have a strong and stable platform from which to lead our national strategy and to deliver on our bold aspirations to grow cricket as Australia’s favourite sport and a sport for all Australians,” Sutherland added.