Sports quiz of the week: Confederations Cup, Lions, Tour de France and hackers

p

p

Where is the peloton? What took 30.81 seconds? And who wasn’t careful enough?

A Chile fan arrives for a Confederations Cup match.

Photograph: Kirill Kudryavtsev/AFP/Getty Images

In which country will the Tour de France begin on Saturday?

France

Germany With a 14km time trial in Düsseldorf.

England

Andorra

When was the last time the Lions came from 1-0 down to win a series against the All Blacks in New Zealand?

1904

1971

1983

Never The Lions have played 39 Tests against the All Blacks, lost 30 of them and only won one series in New Zealand, in 1971, when they won the first Test. Don’t build your hopes up Lions fans.

What did Wayde van Niekerk achieve in 30.81 seconds this week?

Hit the first six in a day-night county cricket match

He cycled 1km

He picked up a red card at a Confederations Cup match

He set a new 300m world record The South African set the record in Czech Republic, becoming the first man in history to have run 100m in less than 10 seconds, 200m in less than 20 seconds, 300m in less than 31 seconds and 400m in less than 44 seconds.

The England Under-21 team kept up the country's record of losing on penalties when they were knocked out of the U21 Euros by Germany in a shootout. In which of these tournaments did the senior team not go out on penalties?

World Cup 1990

Euro 1996

World Cup 1998

Euro 2004

World Cup 2006

Euro 2008 They didn't qualify.

Who is England’s most capped player at Under-21 level, with 46 appearances?

Scott Carson

Danny Rose

Fabrice Muamba

James Milner Milner also has 61 caps for the senior team.

UFC fighter Justine Kish lost to Felice Herrig at the weekend. What was unusual about the fight?

They are sisters-in-law

Herrig closed her eyes to lure Kish forwards and then knocked her out with one punch

Herrig was Kish's former coach until she decided she could make more money fighting

Kish pooed herself during the bout “This is so hard because I don’t want to talk shit," said Herrig, somewhat unwittingly, after the fight. "I really like Justine. We’re friends. If I was in this position I wouldn’t want people talking about it and making fun of me but I know Justine’s making light of it. She made a funny tweet about it saying 'shit happens'."

A fortnight ago Indianapolis Colts owner Jim Irsay tweeted: "I've been hacked! Be careful out there." What did he post this week?

A tweet in which he called the team's manager "a waste of space and money"

Pictures of a star player's contract, including his salary and phone number

A tweet in which he called Donald Trump an "ugly, dumb-ass, no-good punk"

A picture of a naked woman The woman in question was Hungarian porn actor Anette Dawn. Let's hope those pesky hackers are found.

Claudio Bravo became Chile's hero in the Confederations Cup semi-final when he saved all three of the penalties he faced in the shootout against Portugal. How many saves did he make for Manchester City in 2017?

Three But he's great with the ball at his feet, apparently.

Five

Seven

11

Nigel Benn and Steve Collins have agreed to fight each other for a third time later this year. When were their first two fights?

1996 "It's just about money, a payday which will allow me to buy some more land," said Collins. "I have no problem with Nigel. I have a lot of respect. I like him."

2001

2006

2010

According to John McEnroe, where would Serena Williams be in the world rankings if she played on the men's tour?

"Just below the big four"

"Top 20"

"In the top 100"

"Like 700" Dmitry Tursunov, the world No701, said: "I would hope that I would win against Serena. Physically I might not be in the best shape of my life but as an overall package I'm much better than my ranking would suggest. She is pregnant, and I'm not."

You got…

Challenge your friends