In pursuit of perfection: Cameron Smith a champion in every sense

C ameron Smith’s time representing Queensland and Australia is over. The captain of the Maroons and Kangaroos shocked the rugby league world on Tuesday by announcing his immediate retirement from all forms of representative football.

He retires from the representative arena as the most successful player and captain in the history of the game. No player has produced a more stellar career resume in higher level rugby league than the incomparable Smith, universally regarded as the finest hooker to play the game and widely considered the finest captain the sport has known.

For most of the greats that have graced a rugby league field, they have been defined and remembered by moments, by individual games, by runs of form: Andrew Johns’ try in the 1997 grand final; Clive Churchill’s famous performance in the 1954 decider; Wally Lewis carrying Queensland on his back in the 1980s.

For Smith though, it is different. His career is defined by the whole, the accumulation of success at every level that no player in the long and storied history of the game has come even close to matching. Smith’s game and contribution isn’t about individual moments of brilliance. It is about a sustained level of excellence. It is about the pursuit of perfection, the refusal to tolerate defeat, the understanding of both the role of the individual and the needs of the team. Smith was a marathon runner who could not be beaten, running to his own time, dictating through his ability to keep on pushing. Even the greats had costly errors or runs of poor form. Not Smith. He didn’t make errors. He has never lost form.

Sign up to receive the latest Australian sports stories every day

From group success to individual accolades, Smith achieved more in representative football than even the most Peter Pan of dreamers could conjure. His record speaks for itself.

No player has run out for more State of Origins and his 26 wins for Queensland is an Origin record. Wearing maroon, he won seven man of the match awards and captained Queensland 21 times. Four times he was awarded the Wally Lewis medal as Queensland’s best.

Smith’s Queensland story though is more than numbers. His rise didn’t match the Maroons rise from the brink – his ascendancy drove the golden era of Queensland rugby league. The Maroons’ 10 series wins in the last 11 years is a sustained period of success that sits below only St George’s fabled run of 11 straight premierships in the pantheon of great teams. Smith was the one constant, the most important contributor both on and off the field.

His record with Australia is near-perfect, winning 49 of 56 Tests for the Kangaroos. Those 56 appearances – 33 as skipper – rank second behind only Darren Lockyer. Smith captained Australia to two World Cup wins along with a Four Nations crown. Australia lost just three Tests under Smith’s leadership.

There has been no greater winner in rugby league than Smith. And there has also been no better footballer. The game has seen better athletes, particularly in the last quarter century where the game became truly professional. There have been players capable of more wow moments. There have been prettier players, faster players, stronger players, bigger players, more famous players, more loved players, more lauded players. But there has never been a more complete player.

Smith has risen above them all though with his intelligence, drive, leadership and relentless pursuit of perfection. His smarts are without peer and are shown in the subtleties of his game that is anything but flash. He shirks no issue, fends off no task. Team-mates love him. He cannot stomach failure.

An era has ended with Smith’s retirement. The centrepiece of Queensland’s golden era has bid farewell. Australia’s finest captain has passed on the baton. He leaves with his legacy secure though – as rugby league’s most complete footballer with a resume that will never be matched.