England will take fight to India in second T20, says David Willey

After the kindergarten clash with the Aussies there is something a little spicier to savour as the white-ball section of the summer continues against India. There were a few animated exchanges between the players in the first T20 match at Old Trafford, something which was conspicuously absent when England were playing Australia. More pertinently, England were confronted with much stronger opposition and were duly thrashed by eight wickets.

David Willey was in the centre of a little contretemps with Bhuvneshwar Kumar in Manchester on Tuesday and like his father he is not shy about having an argument if necessary – although my recollection is that it was more the size of his forearms than the fierceness of his tongue that made Peter Willey a figure capable of intimidating the odd opponent or colleague.

Young David confirmed: “I don’t mind a bit of confrontation. I have had my fair share of it in the past. If it comes my way I am quite happy to get involved. But we are advised to play cricket and leave those antics to other people.”

Then there was some shrugging of the substantial Willey shoulders. “They have a few fiery characters and that is part and parcel of cricket. It was something and nothing [at Old Trafford]. I think with all the microphones and cameras, people get a bit giddy about this sort of thing.”

On Friday evening in Cardiff, where England play the second T20 international, there will not be a football match to raise the spirits after a defeat. To prevail England must combat the left-arm wrist spin rather better than they did in Manchester, where Kuldeep Yadav took five for 24. It was a good time for England to succumb ineptly since most of the nation was absorbed in a different contest at the time.

As a consequence of that batting performance, Merlyn was wheeled out into the nets behind the stands at  Sophia Gardens. Merlyn is England’s best spin bowler. Unfortunately it is a machine, a box on stilts with an aperture at the front out of which the ball appears with preordained spin imparted. Merlyn’s predecessor (also called Merlyn) was famously used by England in 2005 to combat Shane Warne. In fact, Warne took 40 wickets in that series, which may explain why Merlyn did not receive an OBE.

On Thursday Jos Buttler, Alex Hales and Eoin Morgan had a bat against Merlyn while Joe Root and Jonny Bairstow, both dismissed first ball by Yadav at Old Trafford, preferred facing conventional bowlers – with arms – in the nets on the outfield. Sensibly, the batsmen are allowed to make their own decisions about how they prepare for Friday’s challenge.

The pitch in Cardiff is unlikely to offer as much turn as at Old Trafford and the straight boundaries are short, the square one long. So it is best to hit the spinners straight, but the drive becomes a trickier shot than the sweep when the batsmen do not know which way the ball is going to bounce. Hence the need to try to get to grips with the likes of Kuldeep and the leg-spinner Yuzvendra Chahal.

England, of course, do not want to appear alarmed by the suggestion that they are frail against mystery spin. Willey was quick to point out: “I think our averages and stats against spin are unbelievable, so it was just one of those days [at Old Trafford]. Someone took a few wickets. Our lads will go away and think about their particular approach to it and we’ll come back and have full confidence in all the guys. Yes, it cost us in that last game but we don’t dwell upon things like that.”

England expect to play the same team as at Old Trafford with the strong possibility that Ben Stokes will return to the side for Sunday’s game in Bristol, which puts the onus upon Alex Hales, in particular, to make a significant contribution here. Unless they are in experimental mode, India will surely play the same team as well.

England (possible): EJG Morgan (Captain), JJ Roy, JC Buttler (wkt), AD Hales, JE Root, JM Bairstow, MM Ali, DJ Willey, AU Rashid, CJ Jordan, LE Plunkett

India (possible): V Kohli (Captain), R Sharma, S Dhawan, KL Rahul, S Raina, MS Dhoni (wkt), H Pandya, B Kumar, K Yadav, U Yadav, Y Chahal

Umpires: T Robinson and M Gough

Third umpire: A Wharf

Match referee: D Boon (Aus)

Probable teams England JJ Roy, JC Buttler (wkt), AD Hales, EJG Morgan (capt), JM Bairstow, JE Root, MM Ali, DJ Willey, CJ Jordan, LE Plunkett, AU Rashid. India S Dhawan, RG Sharma, KL Rahul, V Kohli (capt), SK Raina, MS Dhoni (wkt), HH Pandya, Y Chahal, K Yadav, B Kumar, UKT Yadav

Ben Stokes carried his bat for Durham but his side were well short in their pursuit of Yorkshire’s 200 as the Vikings kicked off their Vitality Blast campaign with a win. Looking to prove his fitness following a hamstring tear, Stokes batted through 20 overs for a 68-ball 90 not out in a 44-run defeat at Headingley. Stokes was unable to bowl against a home side who amassed 200 for three thanks to 92 not out from Adam Lyth and an unbeaten 53 from Jonny Tattersall, the pair sharing an unbroken 110-run stand in 8.5 overs.