Sports quiz of the week: Wimbledon, Wayne Rooney and Led Zeppelin

p

p

Why Romelu? Who won with Venus Williams? And who is not a Belieber?

• Test your knowledge on previous quizzes

The view from Centre Court at Wimbledon.

Photograph: Michael Steele/Getty Images

Venus Williams will try to win her sixth Wimbledon singles title on Saturday, 17 years after she won her first in 2000. Who won the men's singles that year?

Pete Sampras It would be the last of his seven titles at Wimbledon.

Boris Becker

Andre Agassi

Goran Ivanisevic

Johanna Konta made it to the last four at Wimbledon for the first time this week. In which grand slam did she reach the semi-finals last year?

US Open

Australian Open She lost to eventual winner Angelique Kerber.

French Open

What is the etymology of Romelu Lukaku's forename?

Romelu is the district in Antwerp in which he was born

Romela is his mother's name

He was named after the great Congolese striker Romelu Issama

It is an acronym, composed of the first two letters of his father's three names: Roger Menama Lukaku. Roger was also a good footballer. He played for various clubs and Zaire.

What has Floyd Mayweather asked of the US government?

To make him "secretary of wealth creation" when he retires later this year

To broadcast his fight with Conor McGregor on the White House website for free

To give McGregor a lend of Air Force One so he can fly back to Ireland "with his tail between his legs"

To give him a few more months to pay off a $22m tax bill from 2015 Mayweather said his "empire is rock solid" and the IRS "just wants to be part of the Money May show".

Which of these trophies did Wayne Rooney not win while at Manchester United

Premier League

FA Cup

League Cup

Champions League

Europa League

Community Shield

Fifa Club World Cup

He won all of them Rooney won 16 trophies while at United.

Which manager offered this opinion on the spiralling sums of money involved in football: "The money in football is absurd but it is like that in other sports and also in show business. You have Bieber, who is earning a lot more than Rolling Stones, not to mention Led Zeppelin or Elvis Presley. Everything cracked, nothing is normal any more"?

Ronald Koeman

Gareth Southgate

Jürgen Klopp

Slaven Bilic Bilic is clearly not a Belieber. More fool him.

Wayne Rooney's last game for Everton was a 5-1 defeat by Manchester City in May 2004. Who scored two goals for City that day?

Danny Mills

Paulo Wanchope Nicolas Anelka, Antoine Sibierski and Shaun Wright-Phillips also scored for City; Kevin Campbell scored Everton's goal.

Darius Vassell

Andy Cole

How did South African football club Usuthu react when they finished fifth in the league and missed out on promotion to the top division?

They bought the league champions and secured their place in the top tier It is the second time the club have bought their way back into the top flight, having used the same tactic in 2005.

The players said they would forego their wages for a year

The manager quit his job, quit football and vowed never to set foot in South Africa again

The owner sold all 11 players who started their last game of the season

Why was Jurij Rodionov's match at Wimbledon held up by a short delay?

His taxi driver took him to Wimbledon Greyhound Stadium rather than the tennis courts

He was asked to wear a lighter colour of underwear Wimbledon's clothing regulations state: "Undergarments that either are or can be visible during play (including due to perspiration) must also be completely white."

His phone rang in his bag as he was about to take his first serve of the match

He had to redye his hair, which was red, white and blue and deemed "inappropriate"

Which of the teams at the Uefa Women’s Euro 2017 tournament will wear a lioness on their shirt rather than a lion?

England

Scotland

Wales

Holland The new shirt will be worn for the first time at Euro 2017 later this month. Nike says the new crest aims to inspire a new generation of players to "wear what you are".

You got…

Challenge your friends