F1 rules give Daniel Ricciardo no chance in Canada despite Monaco victory

T he unadulterated delight Red Bull’s Daniel Ricciardo displayed after winning in Monaco was entirely understandable. After finally claiming the Monte Carlo victory he so desperately wanted, riding a wave of ecstatic emotion was wholly deserved. This week at the Canadian Grand Prix, however, the Australian will be brought back to earth with a painful reminder of the realities of Formula One. He will doubtless still be grinning but likely through gritted teeth in Montreal.

Ricciardo’s joy in Monaco came in the redemption he had sought after a pit‑stop error by the team cost him a win in 2016. He also did it against the odds. When his MGU-K gave out he was leading but spent the remaining 65%!o(MISSING)f the race 161bhp down on the pursuing Sebastian Vettel and Lewis Hamilton. The race was no thriller but Ricciardo’s achievement in managing a partly crippled car and this most demanding of tracks with flawless precision could only be admired.

He now has two wins this season, the same as Hamilton and Vettel and, but for retirements because of an engine problem in Bahrain and his crash with Max Verstappen in Baku, would likely be far closer than the 24 points he trails Vettel, who is second behind Hamilton in the world championship. His Red Bull would have been up against it this weekend on the power‑hungry straights of the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve, but any hope he might have had of narrowing the gap has gone before he has turned a wheel in anger.

The failure of the MGU-K means he will take a third replacement in Montreal, one more than is permitted and consequently a 10-place grid penalty. More may follow. He has also already used the maximum number of batteries and control electronics, replacing either will add five further places each. Red Bull’s chief technical officer, Adrian Newey, said they are waiting to hear from engine supplier, Renault, on the fate of the battery.

Ricciardo, who might play a part in the title fight, may start from the back of the grid. Amid all the talk of F1’s future, successfully addressing this is a key task facing the sport’s owners Liberty Media.

Ricciardo is not being singled out unfairly and the rules, instigated as a way of attempting to control costs, apply to all drivers. But his case does illustrate again how damaging they can be for the sport. Liberty has indicated that building the fan base is at the heart of its plans. This is far from just about numbers but increasingly appears to be central to how F1 survives in future.

The old model of exorbitant race fees and broadcasting rights as the sport’s central incomes is clearly being considered and already Liberty has begun offering direct sale of races to fans. If this model continues and expands, keeping those paying fans and bringing in new ones will be fundamental to F1.

The Canadian Grand Prix will be a tough sell to anyone who might want to tune in to see how Ricciardo fares after his Monaco win only to discover he does not have a chance before the weekend has begun. The same confusion and disenchantment would be felt by supporters of any driver, but it is particularly poor publicity when it affects race winners and those in the title fight.

Equally, even when not impacting on the front of the grid, it can be farcically complex. Last season a total of 740 grid penalties were imposed for power unit changes alone – not including gearbox replacements. At Monza the situation reached a nadir. Nine drivers took penalties accruing 150 places and changing the qualifying results to such an extent that Hamilton on pole and Romain Grosjean, who crashed in Q1, were the only drivers to retain their original positions.

There has been no shortage of critics and Newey was understandably unhappy. “We could be suffering some quite big penalties,” he said. “We are only allowed two batteries and the system in that sense seems completely wrong.”

F1’s sporting director, Ross Brawn, has been unequivocal in his distaste for the penalties and has incisively identified why it matters so much in Liberty’s new vision. “For a fan to stomach that his hero is on the back of the grid because he had to change the engine, that’s not great sport,” he said.

“We’ve got to find a solution to that, either through a different form of penalty or to remove the penalty altogether and just live with the problem that it was trying to fix.”

When Liberty announced its five-point plan for the future of F1 at Bahrain this year it acknowledged that addressing the issue was central to the new regulations set for 2021, stating that it intended to “reduce the necessity of grid penalties”.

Change before then seems highly unlikely given that the system is linked to the current design of power units. But the problem illustrated by Ricciardo’s predicament is that it impacts so directly on the entertainment side of the sport and in a way that is impenetrable to casual fans. Addressing it correctly for 2021 is more important than ever but just as new aero rules have been imposed for 2019 this is another area where Brawn and Liberty might at least look into fast-tracking an interim alternative.