Tiger Woods happy to be back at US Open but wary of missing his tee time

American says traffic on Long Island could be a problem Three-time winner says taking part is a bonus

Tiger Woods prepares for the US Open at Shinnecock Hills.

Photograph: Warren Little/Getty Images

The US Open’s attachment to controversy continues not only apace but in various forms. This, the 118th staging of the major, has included its most famous participant warning that players may miss tee times because of traffic chaos in the vicinity of the course.

An abundance of recent and high‑profile US Open matters include widespread criticism of course conditions at Chambers Bay in 2015 and a rules abomination featuring the 2016 champion, Dustin Johnson. The tournament’s last visit here, in 2004, became infamous for borderline unplayable greens during round four.

Early discussion at the second major of the year has surrounded road congestion on Long Island. The matter has not been lost on Tiger Woods. “There are a few guys who have said it’s taken them from the hotel two and a half hours,” the three-times US Open champion said. “There’s a good chance that someone might miss his [tee] time. You get a little traffic, you get maybe a little fender bender. It’s not inconceivable someone could miss his time.”

Given Woods is not prone to loose comment, this will be interpreted as a high-profile warning to the United States Golf Association. Woods is staying on his $20m yacht – named Privacy – docked in nearby Sag Harbour. Presuming he can properly negotiate the daily route to Shinnecock, Woods will seek to end a major victory wait that started after this event in 2008.

Twelve months ago he was in the early stages of recuperation from a fourth back surgery. In May 2017 he was arrested on a driving under the influence charge. Asked how his life had change since the latter, embarrassing event, his answer was curt. “It has gotten better,” he said.

Sign up to The Recap, our weekly email of editors’ picks.

The 42-year-old was more expansive on the changes to his professional situation since the last US Open, which he watched on television. “There’s really was no expectation to have the thought that I could be here again. I was just given the OK to start walking again, start moving around so I hadn’t been cleared to start lifting yet. It was about just having my standard of life. Forget golf. Can I participate in my kids’ lives again? That’s something that I had missed for a few years and that was the main goal of it.

“Then it was a bonus to hear: ‘Why don’t you go hit some putts today? Really? I can putt?’ And then it was chip. When I was at the Presidents Cup [in September] I had no idea. I hadn’t been cleared. So to go from there to where I’m at now, I had no expectation of getting this far. A lot of this is pure bonus because of where I was. To be able to have this opportunity to play USGA events, to play against these guys, it’s just a great feeling and one that I don’t take for granted.”

His prospects have been endorsed by Jordan Spieth. Woods and Spieth played a practice round here on Sunday, with the Texan suitably impressed. “He’s playing good enough golf to win a tournament at any point in time,” he said.

“Nobody would ever count out probably the most clutch putter and short-game player of all time and then he’s striking the ball extremely well, the rounds I’ve played with him. He’s hitting the driver long and straight, working it both ways. It’s a matter of time in my opinion.”

Woods reflected on a bittersweet year when he has finished second at the Valspar Championship and been in contention to win the Arnold Palmer Invitational but failed to challenge at the Masters. “There’s two ways of looking at that,” he said. “I’ve given myself chances to win. Then again I’m not happy with the fact that I didn’t win because I loved how it felt being there.

“I’ve had my opportunities. I’m very thankful to have had those opportunities. I didn’t know if I was going to have them again.”