Tour de France: Dylan Groenewegen sprints to stage seven victory

The 2018 Tour de France turned east with a soporific stage, so lacking in action that it would have been welcomed by insomniacs. The 231km trawl, the longest of the race, through the Mayenne and Sarthe to Chartres, was enlivened only by the peloton speeding into the cathedral city for an inevitable sprint finish, won by the Dutchman Dylan Groenewegen (Lotto NL-Jumbo) from Fernando Gaviria (Quick-Step) and Peter Sagan (Bora-Hansgrohe). Greg Van Avermaet remains in the yellow jersey.

But there were finally stirrings of past glories from Mark Cavendish, who was in contention until the final 100m of the sprint. “I was following quite good wheels, but it was choppy. There were a few ‘renegades’ about,” the Dimension Data rider said. “I was picking wheels and seemed to be a good position. When I kicked my power was pretty good but it wasn’t enough. Once Quick-Step and Bora go, I can’t match that speed. I had a little coming together with Alexander Kristoff – it might’ve been my fault – and it just stopped me dead.

“I just keep trying, our backs are against the wall all the time here. It’s not going to be easy to win here but we keep trying. Also, if those cycling journalists talked about some really choppy riders rather than me, trying to get clicks, then we’d see who they really are.”

On a stage so lifeless that the Quick-Step team’s Twitter feed was reduced to waxing lyrically about the grandeur of Chartres cathedral and noting the importance of Asterix to French popular culture, there was little to write home about.

Bernard Hinault went on the attack, even in retirement, at defending champion, Chris Froome, over his salbutamol case. “The other day I was with a youth cycling coach and before races parents have been giving Ventolin to children who aren’t sick,” the Frenchman said. “People copy what the stars do.

“I wish Froome all the best as he’s up against a lot of people who don’t want him there. Mentally it must be tough to have all those people booing.”

“Water off a duck’s back,” Froome said at the finish when told of the Frenchman’s latest comments. “I certainly don’t hold any resentment. I’m not fazed by it at all. Over the years we’ve always come up against one thing or another.”

There was further fallout too from Tom Dumoulin’s time penalty, imposed after Thursday’s finish to Mûr-de-Bretagne, when Froome’s rival slipstreamed his team car after suffering a broken wheel five kilometres from the finish.

“I’m fine with the penalty but they have to impose it for everyone if they do the same thing as me,” the 2017 Giro d’Italia champion said. Privately Dumoulin’s Sunweb team feel that his biggest mistake was being caught on camera, while others using similar drafting tactics away from the cameras went unnoticed.

Geraint Thomas meanwhile played down suggestions that his role within Team Sky had changed after he eased clear of defending champion Chris Froome on Thursday’s hill climb finish.

“Not really,” he responded. “My role is just getting through the cobbles as best as possible, attacking it for sure, and getting into the Alps. I’ll have to get through the Alps and see how I am, see how Froome is and go from there. A hell of a lot can happen between now and the end of all that.”

Sunday’s key stage over the cobbled roads of the “Hell of the North”, used in the spring classic Paris-Roubaix, is now looming on the horizon, and most teams are focusing on the sporting and logistical demands of racing on roads that are sure to create drama.

Thomas, who won the Junior Paris-Roubaix as a teenager, knows the ruptured pavé well. “They’re proper cobbles and there is potential to be unlucky and puncture at the wrong time, which does feel a bit random. But it’s the same for everyone.

“The whole day is going to be full gas. The first two or three [sectors of cobbles] are spaced apart, but then they come thick and fast. It’ll just be about being in the front all day really. Your team-mates can help you a bit but a lot of the time you’ll find yourself on your own and need to do it yourself.”

Froome agreed that the stage would have all the drama of a mini Paris-Roubaix. “It’s going to be brutal,” he said. “There’s no two ways about it. Everyone knows that, everyone’s waiting for that.”