Sky Sports Racing has plenty going for it in two-horse race with Racing UK

Resilience in the face of adversity was a theme of At The Races’ final broadcast from the Punchestown Festival last week, as Paul Townend overcame an astonishing calamity on the opening day to ride a treble the next day. And the channel itself will now feel it has bounced back somewhat after losing the rights to cover Irish racing to its fierce rival Racing UK, with the news that ATR has lured two British tracks in the opposite direction and will join the Sky Sports family of dedicated channels by the end of this year.

In terms of the numbers of courses and races linked to the two channels the picture still looks a lot worse for ATR – or Sky Sports Racing, as it will soon be known – than it did at the start of the year. Ireland has 26 tracks and Chelmsford is also switching to RUK, so their total across Britain and Ireland will rise to 62 courses next year while Sky Sports Racing will broadcast action from 24. RUK will also have close to 1,200 scheduled fixtures, while Sky Sports Racing will have about 650.

Yet having taken a standing eight count and then spent some time slumped on its stool between rounds, ATR will feel that the arrival of Chester – along with its sister track, Bangor-on-Dee – is a sharp jab that will remind its rival it is still in a fight.

Chester’s move to Sky Sports Racing will not only improve the quality of its output significantly and immediately but could easily tempt other independent tracks to follow suit. Chester is widely, and rightly, seen as one of the most progressive, successful and well-run tracks in the country and a 10-year deal is a clear sign that its executives are in for the long haul. “We see real value in what the partnership can bring across TV, digital and social media,” Richard Thomas, Chester’s chief executive, said on Monday, and if Sky Sports Racing is good enough for them, it could suddenly look like an interesting proposition for other courses, too.

The impact of association with the Sky Sports brand – the home of Premier League football, England’s home Test matches and the Ryder Cup – should also not be underestimated. Sky Sports Racing will be free to all Sky subscribers rather than becoming part of the premium Sky Sports package, which also means Virgin Media’s cable TV customers will also still receive it at no extra cost. But the switch to Sky, whereby ATR’s content will be broadcast in HD for the first time and production moves to Sky’s west London studios, will make it feel like a place that the bigger independent tracks could call home and offer the chance for cross-promotion across the whole range of Sky’s channels.

York is one track that might be tempted but the real prize here is undoubtedly Ascot, which switched from ATR to RUK in 2014 but recently invited tenders from interested parties for its non‑terrestrial rights from March next year.

The Queen’s course is famously canny when it comes to choosing its partners and deals and it is worth a considerable amount of money to both sides. Sky Sports Racing, though, might be willing to pay that little bit more for the prestige that Ascot would bring to its early years. And though it is five years down the line, Ireland’s controversial switch to the RUK subscription model, which was in effect taken for them by the rights holder SIS, is also likely to be revisited in time.

Another interesting point is that Sky Sports Racing will be available on Sky’s mobile service, Sky Go. The smartphone generation increasingly resents being tied to the living room TV and it will soon have racing coverage on offer every time it fires up the app.

Some were questioning the long-term viability of ATR back in February but the two‑channel status quo for racing’s non‑terrestrial coverage now appears much more secure.

Nottingham 2.00 Delft Dancer 2.30 Mushtaq 3.00 Tig Tog 3.35 Red Tea (nap) 4.05 Apache Blaze 4.35 Zenafire 5.05 Dotted Swiss

Yarmouth 2.10 Artair 2.40 Corelli 3.15 Raven Banner 3.45 Salt Whistle Bay 4.15 The Lacemaker 4.45 Gainsay 5.15 Olive Mabel 5.50 Misu Pete

Brighton 2.20 Wedding Date 2.50 Font Vert 3.25 Mr Pocket (nb) 3.55 Precious Ramotswe 4.25 Bloodsweatandtears 4.55 Balgair 5.25 Sussex Girl

Newcastle 5.20 Florencio 5.55 Gowanbuster 6.25 Walk On Walter 6.55 Hediddodinthe 7.25 Tom’s Rock 7.55 Kiwi Bay 8.25 Who Told Jo Jo

Kempton Park 5.45 Its The Only Way 6.15 Chynna 6.45 Freddy With A Y 7.15 Arod 7.45 Amazing Red 8.15 Arigato 8.45 Desert Trip