Angelique Kerber books Wimbledon final place after Ostapenko misfires

When an irresistible force meets an immovable object, something always has to give. But here on Thursday it was never going to be Angelique Kerber. She was at her resilient best as she repelled the power of Jelena Ostapenko 6-3, 6-3 to reach the Wimbledon final for the second time in three years. After winning two grand slam titles in 2016 and then struggling to cope in 2017, the German is back.

Ostapenko, who turned 21 last month, possesses so much power that, when she is on her game – as she showed at the French Open last year when she won her first grand slam title – few can match it. Her backhand drew gasps from the Centre Court crowd and had Kerber on the run.

But the 11th seed soaked up the power, ran everything down and except for a mini-wobble at the end, when Ostapenko came at her again, never allowed the Latvian the chance to believe. By the end she had made only seven unforced errors, a brick wall in the face of a barrage. Ostapenko made 36.

Saturday’s final against Serena Williams will be a repeat of 2016’s, when the American won a tight two-setter to claim a seventh Wimbledon crown.

That was the year Kerber won her two majors – in Australia, where she beat Williams in the final, and at the US Open, when she edged out Karolina Pliskova. After reaching the No 1 ranking she somehow lost her motivation, lost her focus and it is only this year she has regained that kind of form.

“I’m really proud to be back in the Wimbledon final, especially after last year, where things weren’t like I expected,” she said.

“To be here again, that was a goal when I started this year, to play good in the grand slams and also to reaching finals again. It’s a great feeling. It’s still one more match to go. But I think for me it’s great.”

Ostapenko, the 12th seed, had not dropped a set on her way to a first Wimbledon semi-final and she began well, saving a break point in the opening game. When the score was 2-2, all 13 of her points had come from winners. It was all or nothing, high-risk tennis from the Latvian – she knows no other way – and she stayed with Kerber to 3-3, until an errant backhand handed the German the break.

Kerber held a tight service game to go ahead 5-3 and took the set when Ostapenko double-faulted, before racing ahead 3-0 in the second set as the errors flowed from the Ostapenko racket. The left-handed Kerber extended her lead to 5-1 but Ostapenko saved a match point with a monstrous backhand and then broke back moments later.

At that stage Kerber suddenly looked nervous. Ostapenko held for 5-3 and had a break point in the next game, only to net her return. Kerber finally got over the line when Ostapenko’s forehand drifted wide, sending her into a fourth grand slam final. “I was trying to not think too much because I know how she played a lot of good matches where she came back from a score like that, then she has nothing to lose and she is even playing better,” Kerber said.

“I was just trying to focus on my serve in the last game, trying to hold it because I think that was then the key at the end because you never know what [might] happen [if] I had lost the game for 4-5.”

So fine are the margins. Ostapenko, who said she felt the Centre Court had played slower than the outside courts, where she had played her previous four matches, agreed that things might have changed if she had been able to grab that second break back.

“Yes, I felt the match could turn the other way,” she said. “She started already to miss a couple of balls which she didn’t before because she was playing very consistent during the whole match.

“But then, again, I was rushing too much and hit some unforced errors, which I shouldn’t, of course. Then the match finished.”

And so, for the third time in her four grand slam finals, Kerber will meet Williams for the title. The 30-year-old said she is looking forward to it.

“I think it is a completely new match,” she said. “I think we both learned a lot. She’s coming back. I’m coming back from 2017. I know that I have to play my best.”