Jordan Spieth fails to find Hogan’s Alley and suffers Open collapse

C arnoustie’s 6th is a 580-yard par-five that runs inland from the sea. The fairway is split, to one side there is a track, which is out of bounds, and on the other is a set of four bunkers. They call it Hogan’s Alley, because when Ben Hogan won the Open here in 1953 he is said to have slotted the ball down the left and through that narrow little corridor, a gap around 25ft wide, on all four days he played. It was here, 65 years later, that Jordan Spieth, the greatest golfer to come out of Texas since Hogan finished, settled his championship, with a drive that flew wide the other side.

Spieth started the day at nine under, in a three-way tie with two men who had never won a major before, Kevin Kisner and Xander Schauffele. He was the favourite, then, and set to become the first man under 25 to win two Open championships back-to-back since Young Tom Morris did it back in the 19th century. Dan Jenkins, doyen of the US golf writers, and as Texan as a 10-gallon hat, described Spieth as “the perfect Texas pro” with “the will and focus of Ben Hogan, the likability of Byron Nelson, and the putting stroke of Ben Crenshaw”.

Which is true, but Spieth has got a volatile streak in him, too. He just does a very good impression of a man who is in complete control of himself. He keeps a tight lid on the wild and temperamental side. But sometimes that Hoganesque “will and focus” slips. Which is why he blew up when he was leading the Masters in 2014, with back-to-back bogeys at the 8th and 9th, and again two years later, when he took a quadruple bogey at the 12th. Then when he won last year’s Open, of course, he did it with that extraordinary shot from off the practice grounds behind the 13th.

With Spieth, you can be sure there will be a wobble sooner or later. The only question is whether it is going to throw him right off or not. This time, it did. You could see it coming when Spieth was playing the first four holes, which he covered in even-par. He was teetering. The gusting wind seemed to throw his sense of which club to use and when. He was criticising himself for using the “wrong stick, man” at the 2nd, and he got it wrong again at the 3rd.

His putter was running cold, too. It has done all year long. At the 5th he hit his drive into a bunker and had to flop out, which cost him a shot.

Then he came to the 6th. Where Hogan went left, Spieth tried to fight the wind and his ball flew right, into the crowd. He ordered them back and chose to play a three‑wood. The ball shot off over the brow of a hill as he cried “fore!” It landed with a thump in a thick gorse bush, the only one in that corner of the course, and was lost from sight. Spieth’s mind immediately went into crisis mode, as he started work on all the little decisions he would need to make to get out of this mess. First he had to find the thing. “Did anybody see exactly where it went?”

Spieth made a point of stopping to listen to the one man in crowd who was speaking with any certainty, then said “can we get as many hands on deck as possible, please?” and everyone piled in to try and help him find it. He cut his hands on the thorns, and was just about to pull on a jumper for protection when someone called out with a shout. It was a David Dawson, a member here, working as a marshal for the week. “I’m used to looking for balls in gorse bushes,” Dawson said with a grin. Spieth picked up the ball and called an unplayable lie.

It all felt very familiar. It was even the same rules official Spieth had been negotiating with in 2017. The difference was that then, Spieth managed to scramble out of trouble with a bogey. This time, he clipped his next shot on to the back of the green before taking three putts to get in from 30ft. Which made it a double. He had dropped three shots in two holes, and lost the outright lead. He spent the next seven holes grinding away, hurrying through the turn because he was on the clock for playing so slowly.

Spieth needed only one birdie to get back in it. But it just would not come. His putting touch, which he was convinced he had fixed, was not quite there. And when he finally had a good opportunity, on the par-five 14th, he missed from 4ft. That made it eight successive pars. There were two bogeys coming home, so he finally signed for 76.

“Well, I’m not going to win every single time,” Spieth said. “I’ve already gone through the frustration. I’m kind of on acceptance.” Still, Hogan’s Alley has a new feature now. Spieth’s shrub.