Sports quiz of the week: losers, dogs, fights and a world record at 10am

p

p

Who celebrated defeat? Who won without winning? And who was unlucky?

p Premier League at 25: the big quiz

A Manchester United fan watches his team play Barcelona.

Photograph: John Peters/Man Utd via Getty Images

Which football manager said: "It’s very important to lose in pre-season" – after losing?

Pep Guardiola

Zinedine Zidane

Jürgen Klopp

José Mourinho Who else. Mourinho continued: "It would be very bad for us to leave the US without a defeat against teams like Barcelona, Real Madrid and City. It would be very bad to leave just with victories. So the defeat is good."

Last week Lucky Whitehead said his dog had been kidnapped. What other misfortune befell the Cowboys receiver this week?

His electric fence broke and he was trapped in his house for three days

He was struck by lightning twice in one night

His family won the lottery but he didn’t join the syndicate

He was falsely accused of shoplifting and released by the Cowboys Perhaps he should start using his birth name, Rodney.

Why was Turkey manager Fatih Terim sacked this week?

He said watching his team was "like staring at a cow for 90 minutes"

He called the head of the Turkish football association "a six-foot scowl"

He signed up to be a commentator for the next World Cup

He was filmed fighting at a restaurant Terim said he did not go there to fight, but that he became involved to help his son-in-law’s sister and he did not regret what he had done.

In which country might Magdalena Eriksson of Sweden line up against her girlfriend, Pernille Harder of Denmark, in a final?

England

The Netherlands At the Euro 2017 final, where Eriksson is playing for Sweden and Harder is playing for Denmark.

France

Australia

What was Diego Costa up to this week while his Chelsea team-mates were in Singapore for pre-season training?

Taking his pet dog Bella for a ride on a jet ski in Brazil It's good to see Costa enjoying his new pet as he went through a tough time after his last dog died. "Diego brought his Yorkshire Terrier to Madrid," said his Atlético team-mate Paulo Assunção. "But one day when he was parking and didn’t realise the dog was behind the car, he reversed over it. He was devastated, totally depressed for a month. When I asked him why he was so low he practically broke down. He said: ‘I can’t believe it. I killed my dog. He came out of the house to greet me and I didn’t see him and I ran over him.'"

Trekking to Everest Base Camp

Doing an internship for an architecture magazine in London

Sparring with Conor McGregor before his fight against Floyd Mayweather

Who said: "It’s 10am. It’s quite early for a world record"?

Bill Kilgore

Katie Ledecky

Adam Peaty Peaty broke the 50m breaststroke world record twice in one day this week.

Tom Daley

Cricket could be making a return to the Olympics in 2024. The sport has only featured at the Games once, in 1900. Which two teams took part in the tournament?

England and Australia

USA and Canada

Great Britain and France Devon and Somerset Wanderers represented Great Britain, with French Athletic Club Union doing the honours for France.

Greece and Scotland

Chris Froome won his fifth Tour de France title in Paris on Sunday. How many stages did he win in this year’s race?

None Froome was the first rider to win the Tour without winning a stage since Óscar Pereiro did it in 2006.

One

Two

Four

What links 1973, 1993 and 2017?

The Tour de France was won by a Briton

Real Madrid broke the world transfer record

England hosted and won the Women's Cricket World Cup They also won it in 2009, when it was hosted in Australia.

A British golfer won the Open

Branden Grace shot the lowest ever score at a major when he hit a 62 at the Open last Saturday. Where did he finish on the final leaderboard on Sunday afternoon?

First

In the top three

In the top 10 Grace finished the weekend eight shots behind eventual winner Jordan Spieth.

In the top 50

You got…

Challenge your friends