Sports quiz of the week: Champions League, Carlo Ancelotti and centurions

p

p

Who needs a trophy room? Who left early? And who struggled with winning?

p Football quiz: which stadium is older?

PSG did for Carlo Ancelotti.

Photograph: Franck Fife/AFP/Getty Images

Where did Bayern Munich finish in the Bundesliga in Carlo Ancelotti's only full season as their manager?

They won the league by 15 points They played 34 games, won 25, drew seven and lost just two.

They won the league on goal difference

They finished second

The finished third

Which footballer said: "I’m hoping to build a room for the match balls and trophies. It isn’t built yet but, hopefully, it will be soon"?

Neymar

Mario Balotelli

Harry Kane Kane scored his sixth hat-trick of the year on Tuesday night, so he might need more space for balls than trophies in his memorabilia room.

Carlton Cole

Why did RB Leipzig player Timo Werner ask to be substituted against Besiktas in the Champions League?

He couldn’t distinguish between the two teams’ shirts

He had missed a penalty and felt "devastated"

He thought the team needed a change of formation

He felt dizzy due to the loud atmosphere His manager said: “He asked to come off so I took him off. It is impossible to prepare your team for an atmosphere like this. There was a deafening noise. As coach, it is important to see who I can rely on in moments like these, who is prepared to defend himself against what is going on on the pitch. To encounter such an atmosphere was too much for some.”

Which athlete has honoured one of his rivals by installing an eight-foot portrait of him in his house?

Floyd Mayweather has put up a portrait of Conor McGregor Mayweather also has one of himself, obviously.

Roger Federer has put up a portrait of Rafa Nadal

Neymar has a put up a portrait of Lionel Messi

Stephen Curry has put up a portrait of Colin Kaepernick

Why was a football match between two Romanian clubs, Bistrita Brosteni and Vanatorul Dorna Can­drenilor, called off after 58 minutes?

The sun went down and the floodlights didn’t work

The referee sent off 10 players – five from each team – after a brawl

All of the available footballs had been kicked into a nearby river The away team were winning 2-0 .

The referee's contact lenses fell out and he didn't feel equipped to continue

What was the only downside for Valencia manager Marcelino after his team beat Real Sociedad with an 85th-minute winner on Sunday?

He had already been sacked at half-time, when his team were losing 2-0

His side won thanks to an own goal scored by his son

He tore his hamstring while celebrating the goal Marcelino said: "As long as it’s only me getting injured, it’s not a problem if it’s the coach. ‘I pulled it quite hard. I’m getting on a bit, after all. Those are situations in which I should control myself better. I’ve come away with a bit of a limp."

All of his players ran and celebrated with his assistant, who he called a "traitor"

Which British club did not win their match in the Champions League this week?

Celtic

Chelsea

Liverpool Liverpool could only draw with Spartak Moscow, despite taking 16 shots.

Manchester City

Manchester United

Tottenham Hotspur

Essex played 14 games in the County Championship this season. How many did they lose?

Fourteen

Two

One

None They went unbeaten for the season for the first time in their history.

In which contest are dragons from Catalonia playing centurions from Leigh on Saturday?

The Big Bash

The State of Origin

The Royal London One-Day Cup

The Million Pound Game The winners will stay in Super League and the losers will be relegated to the Championship.

Barcelona won two matches this week: 3-0 in La Liga and 1-0 in the Champions League. How many of their four goals were scored by Barcelona players?

Four

Three

Two

One Barcelona won the games thanks to three own goals and one from Luis Suárez.

You got…

Challenge your friends