Sports quiz of the week: two big derbies, a petrified referee and a fighting soldier

p

p

What cost a fortune? Who scared Mark Clattenburg? And which Rover returned?

Football quiz: how well do you know the Manchester and Merseyside derbies?

Will Mohamed Salah keep scoring against Everton?

Photograph: Phil Noble/Reuters

How many of the semi-finalists from last season’s Champions League have made it to the last-16 stage this season?

Four

Three

Two Atlético Madrid finished third in their group, so they go into the Europa League; Monaco didn’t win a single game in their group and were knocked out of Europe altogether.

One

None

When did England last win an Ashes Test in Australia?

2017

2015

2013

2011 England won the fifth and final Test of the 2010-11 series by an innings and 83 runs. How times change.

2010

Sam Allardyce has spent all week preparing for his big trip to Anfield on Sunday. Who was the last Everton manager to win a Merseyside derby?

David Unsworth

Ronald Koeman

Roberto Martínez

David Moyes The year was 2010 and Roy Hodgson was in charge of Liverpool. The 2-0 defeat at Goodison left Liverpool in the relegation zone, below Wolves, Birmingham City, Blackburn, Sunderland, Wigan and Fulham. How times change.

Walter Smith

Speaking of derbies, what unites Matt Busby, Steve Coppell and Mark Hughes?

They all played in the Manchester derby and the Merseyside derby

They all scored winners in Manchester derbies in FA Cup finals

They all played for one Manchester club and managed the other Coppell and Hughes played for United before managing City. Busby played for City (and Liverpool) before managing United.

They are the last three players Manchester United have signed from Manchester City

Who became a colonel in his country's army this week?

Mark O'Meara

Conor McGregor

Park Ji-sung

Manny Pacquiao The 38-year-old boxer, who is preparing for a return to the ring next year, is also a senator in the Philippines.

Complete this Jack Wilshere quote: “Positive week…”

“… Played in a 6-0 win for Arsenal and looked like solid gold. BOOM.”

“… Bring on phase two of Brexit talks. We go again.”

“… Managed to get through 20 minutes of ice skating without getting injured” Wilshere also scored his first goal for Arsenal for two and half years.

“… But disappointed not to be on Ballon d'Or longlist”

Who was Mark Clattenburg talking about when he said: "He screamed at us for a corner and I'm sure it was a goal kick but because he screamed at us so loudly, I gave a corner. I was that petrified of him"?

Mauricio Pochettino

José Mourinho

Roy Keane Clattenburg added: "I was still a young boy. I didn't have any experience of dealing with people, managing people, saying the right thing at the right time. It's only when I got older that I started to develop those skills. When you have those skills, you interact with adults better, players better. If you interact with players, they make your life easier. When they make your life easier, you become a good referee."

Patrick Vieira

Which piece of tennis memorabilia sold for $125,000 this week?

A collection of 100 sweatbands worn by Bjorn Borg at Wimbledon

The racquet Fred Perry used when winning Wimbledon in 1934

Thirty-six racquets smashed by John McEnroe in his career

The racquet Billy Jean King used for her Battle of the Sexes match against Bobby Riggs in 1973 Billy Jean King won the match 6-4 6-3 6-3 in front of 30,000 fans at the Houston Astrodome and another 50 million watching at home on TV.

Two of the best boxers in the world – Vasyl Lomachenko and Guillermo Rigondeaux – fight at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night. What makes the bout especially intriguing?

Lomachenko is married to Rigondeaux’s ex-wife

They have met each other in four Olympic finals – but never as pros

Both fighters have won all of their professional fights within three rounds

It is the first ever world title fight between two double Olympic champions Lomachenko won two Olympic gold medals for Ukraine in 2008 and 2012; Rigondeaux won his for Cuba in 2000 and 2004.

Which former Blackburn Rovers player was back in England this week to manage his club in the Champions League?

Brad Friedel

Giorgos Donis Donis, who spent a season at Blackburn in the mid-1990s, is now Apoel Nicosia manager.

Lars Bohinen

Henning Berg

You got…

Challenge your friends