Dame Di Ellis obituary

Dame Di Ellis, who has died aged 79, was a most unlikely physical specimen to ascend to the summit of British rowing. At 5ft 3in tall, she occupied a coxswain’s frame in a world of lofty men and women. But her skills as a competitor, manager and manipulator – in the best sense of the word – took her to the head of one of Britain’s most successful Olympic sports, and propelled her into the orbit of national and international sports institutions.

Competitively, she rowed for Great Britain in 1966, as part of the women’s eight at the European championships, coxed the England women’s four to gold in the 1972 home countries match, and won the women’s eights head of the river race seven times, four as a cox and three as a rower, from 1966 to 1973. She became the first national champion in 1972 on the new 2,000-metre course at Holme Pierrepont, near Nottingham.

However it was as an official that she made her biggest mark. As chair of the Amateur Rowing Association (ARA, which became British Rowing in 2009, much at her behest) for 24 years from 1989, she transformed the amateur body, which was in an impoverished muddle when she took over, into a professionally run and well-funded sport.

It was Di who persuaded David Tanner to take early retirement as a headteacher and set up the high performance rowing programme that has consistently produced Olympic gold medals since the National Lottery came on stream after 1996, when Steve Redgrave and Matt Pinsent won Britain’s only gold medal at the Atlanta games. Tanner described her as “a pulse of the sport, a pioneer, a very strong administrator and leader”.

Di also expanded and developed women’s rowing, which became a phenomenon during her 60 years in the sport. In 1997 she was the first woman elected as a steward of Henley Royal Regatta. Today about 20%!o(MISSING)f Henley’s stewards are women, and this year the regatta introduces three new events for women to bring their open events on a par with those for men. Meanwhile, Henley Women’s Regatta has grown from modest beginnings in 1988 to an enormous three-day event.

The second of three daughters of Robert Hall, a proof reader, and his wife, Mabel (nee Steadman), a nurse, Di attended Ealing girls’ school, in west London, and Guildford College of Technology, Surrey, where she studied management and nutrition. This led to a career with Surrey county council that included management of the school meal service.

She began “messing about in boats” as a teenage Sea Ranger, and competed for Middlesex, becoming a one-oar “sculling-over-the-stern” champion from 1954 to 1957. In 1960 she began rowing at St George’s Ladies rowing club, one of the first clubs to be affiliated to the Women’s Amateur Rowing Association. In 1966, the same year she began her winning streak in the head of the river race, she married John Ellis, a bank official.

She qualified as an umpire in 1978, was secretary of the national championships and chairman of the women’s commission of ARA (both 1984-87), and was made GB team manager in 1988, before taking up the ARA chair.

Di touched every part of the sport, from grassroots to elite, local to international. She was a sound voice as leader of the British delegation at the congress of the international rowing federation, or Fisa (world rowing’s governing body), from 1989 to 2013. Her abilities as a doer and a fixer resulted in a seat on the British Olympic Association in 1995 and promotion to the board (1997-2013). She was on the organising committees of the world championships at Strathclyde in 1996 and Eton Dorney in 2006, and the world junior championships in 2011 and world cup in 2013, both at Dorney.

She held trusteeships and board seats on a host of sporting organisations, including the River & Rowing Museum (2007-15) and the British Olympic Foundation. She won awards from the International Olympic Committee for services to women’s sport and from Fisa for distinguished service to international rowing. She was made a vice-president of the British Olympic Association in 2013 and honorary president of British Rowing in 2014. She was appointed CBE for services to rowing in 2004 and made a dame for services to sport in 2013.

Latterly she was in charge of the three-person team in the finishing tower at Henley. The team clock crews crossing the line by aligning a piece of cord with a black strip on the opposite side of the course. They have a monitor to follow the progress of a race, consult a waterline photo-finish camera if the result is in doubt, check that the umpire raises a white flag to indicate a completed race, translate seconds into “lengths” and pass the verdict to the commentary box.

It is a well-rehearsed routine that is hair-raising during close races, and Di possessed the temperament for it. “She was a very capable administrator,” said the former chairman of the regatta, Mike Sweeney. “She got things done and smoothed out rough water.”

Di is survived by John, their daughter, Claire, grandsons, Daniel and Joseph, and her sisters, Janet and Sue.

• Diana Margaret Ellis, rower and sports official, born 11 April 1938; died 18 May 2017