Sam Warburton announces shock retirement from rugby union aged 29

Warburton cites ‘health and wellbeing’ as reason for decision Warren Gatland: ‘Sam’s one of the best in the world’

Sam Warburton led the British & Irish Lions to a series draw against New Zealand last year.

Photograph: Gibso/Fotosport/Rex/Shutterstock

Sam Warburton was forced to admit his tiring body could no longer cope with the rigours of professional rugby as he announced his shock retirement on Wednesday at the age of 29.

His decision handed Wales a huge blow before next year’s World Cup and means the head coach Warren Gatland will be without one of his best players – and a two-times British & Irish Lions captain – for the tournament in Japan.

Warburton led the Lions to an historic 1-1 Test series draw in New Zealand last year but then missed the whole of the 2017-18 season because of injury.

He underwent neck and then knee surgery in an attempt to return to full fitness, and recently returned to Cardiff Blues training, but the back-row forward decided he would not be able to return to his best form.

“Unfortunately after a long period of rest and rehabilitation the decision to retire from rugby has been made with my health and wellbeing as a priority,” Warburton said. “My body is unable to give me back what I had hoped for on my return to training. I cannot thank the Welsh Rugby Union and Cardiff Blues enough. They have gone beyond the call of duty in providing the support I received to help me get back on the field. I will be forever grateful.

2002

Chooses rugby over football

At the age of 14 Warburton has a trial with Cardiff City, after impressing in his school side alongside Gareth Bale – but decides to focus on rugby union, eventually joining Cardiff Blues' academy.

October 2009

Club success and Wales debut

Warburton wins the European Challenge Cup with Cardiff Blues – the first European trophy for a Welsh side – and is handed his full Wales debut a month later against the USA.

June 2011

Captains his country

Warburton is named captain for the first time against the Barbarians at the age of 22. After Matthew Rees is injured, Warburton goes on to captain the side at the 2011 World Cup.

October 2011

Semi-final heartache

Warburton is one of the tournament's stars as Wales reach their first World Cup semi-final in 22 years, but he is controversially sent off early against France, who go on to reach the final

March 2012

Six Nations slam

Warburton made up for his World Cup disappointment by leading Wales to the grand slam in 2012 – but injury problems began to take their toll. The captain lifted the trophy with one hand after suffering a shoulder injury against France

July 2013

Leading the Lions

Warburton becomes the British & Irish Lions' youngest ever captain for their tour of Australia. The Lions win the first Test but lose the second after Warburton is injured. Sir Clive Woodward describes the flanker's performance as "the best I have ever seen from a Lion".

September 2015

More success with Wales

Warburton captained Wales a record 49 times, adding the 2013 Six Nations title to the 2012 slam. He also led his country to a stunning World Cup victory over hosts England at Twickenham in 2015

July 2017

Second Lions captaincy

Warren Gatland names Warburton as Lions captain for the tour to New Zealand, where the team earn a historic 1-1 series draw. Shortly after, Warburton picks up a new neck injury, and surgery causes him to miss the entire 2017-18 season. On 18 July, he announces his retirement.

Timeline by Niall McVeigh

“I always dreamed of playing for my home town club the Cardiff Blues, Wales and the British & Irish Lions. I’m extremely proud of what I managed to achieve. There are so many people who helped me along the way from school teachers, coaches, friends and family.

I thank you so much for supporting my dreams and aspirations. I hope they too can take some pride from my career.

“I would like to make special mention of Warren Gatland. Without the faith he had in me and his unwavering support, I would never have had the career I was able to pursue.”

The Breakdown: sign up and get our weekly rugby union email

Winning 74 Wales caps and five for the Lions, Warburton led his country a record 49 times and will go down as one of the best Welsh players in history. He bows out with a glittering CV that includes leading Wales to grand slam and Six Nations glory as well as at two World Cups.

However, injuries have blighted his career and the latest in a long line of operations has proved a step too far for him to recover from. “As one chapter finishes, another begins, and I’ll enter it with the same level of passion and determination as the last,” Warburton said.

Gatland, who appointed Warburton as Wales captain at the age of 22 for the 2011 World Cup and made him Lions captain in Australia and New Zealand, said: “It is hugely disappointing Sam has retired. He is an outstanding rugby player and he has brought so much to the game on and off the pitch.

“His leadership, attitude and demeanour along with his performances have placed Sam up there as one of the best and most respected players in the world. He finishes with a record he should be extremely proud of and he should look back on his career with huge pride.

“I hope he can take the time to reflect on a magnificent career and gets as much pleasure from whatever he does next as he delivered to the people of Wales and the wider rugby public.”