Frankie Dettori orchestrates crowd after winning Gold Cup on Stradivarius

Frankie Dettori insists he will ride for another five years at least but every big-race success now offers another reminder of what the sport will lose when he finally retires. Dettori played the crowd like a conductor leading an orchestra as he returned to the winner’s enclosure on Stradivarius after the Gold Cup here on Thursday, having seen off Vazirabad after a bitter struggle in the final furlong. “Sometimes it looks like a great match on paper,” he said. “This developed into a great match, and it was nail-biting to the end. It was thrilling to win a Gold Cup in that manner.”

It was as thrilling for 70,000 spectators as it was for the rider on the track. Stradivarius, the 7-4 joint-favourite, had already seen off his market rival, Order Of St George, when Christophe Soumillon, a master of the cruise-and-pounce ride, loomed up on his inside aboard Vazirabad with a furlong to run. Torcedor, who had led the field into the home straight, was still in there fighting too and all three horses were with a length of each other to the line.

Stradivarius, though, had courage to go with his class on his first run beyond two miles and his win was all the more impressive given that a subsequent inspection found he was lame on his right hind leg, having also lost the shoe on the same foot.

“He was a lion,” Dettori said. “He fought everything off, Order Of St George, Vazirabad, and at the end, he took off. Ryan [Moore, on Order Of St George] was in trouble four furlongs out, but I thought, that can be deceiving and if I attack him now, he could battle me back out of it. I waited to the straight, until past the two-furlong pole and thought, now I can get him, then as I got rid of him, I saw the grey head [of Vazirabad].

“He managed to get within a neck but I knew my horse was brave. The crowd were behind it, it was mental really, I was loving it.”

Soumillon felt that Vazirabad had briefly taken the lead inside the final furlong before being outbattled by the winner. “It was not his day today,” he said. “Frankie was clever and brought his horse close to Vazirabad. I went to the front by a head but he just stops when he gets to the front. It’s a bit frustrating.”

Stradivarius’s success was Dettori’s 60th winner at the Royal meeting, a landmark that he would have reached already had he not been forced to miss last year’s meeting – and winning rides including Big Orange in the Gold Cup – because of injury.

It was a significant moment too for John Gosden, the trainer of Stradivarius, who was filling one of the more obvious gaps on his extensive record. “It was a fascinating tactical race,” Gosden said. “If Frankie had gone too soon there was the danger that Vazirabad would nail him. But he saw it out and he was going away at the finish. He’s a proper little staying horse. We call him Mighty Mouse because he’s not very big and he looks a bit like a mini-Trigger with his four white feet, but he’s a gorgeous horse.”

Stradivarius is now halfway towards a million-pound bonus, which he will earn for his connections if he can follow up in the Goodwood Cup at Glorious Goodwood and the Lonsdale Cup at York in August over the next couple of months. In the longer term, Gosden will consider the Melbourne Cup – “although he might get a lot of weight for a small horse” – and Stradivarius also has an entry in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp in October. Vazirabad could once again be among his rivals at Goodwood.

Dettori’s delight after his victory in the feature event of the meeting is unlikely to be overtaken as the defining image of this year’s Royal Ascot, but it counts for no more than any other race in the riders’ championship and Dettori slipped to second-favourite in that contest after Moore rode a double aboard Hunting Horn and Magic Wand in the Hampton Court Stakes and Ribblesdale Stakes respectively.

Moore now has three winners for the week, one behind Dettori’s total, and the quality of his rides over the final two days has seen him cut to 4-7 favourite for the riders’ title by Hills, with Dettori now out to 11-8 and William Buick, who has two winners, on offer at 20-1.

Magic Wand finished fourth in the Oaks behind her stable companion Forever Together and could now head to the Curragh for the Irish equivalent.

“Forever Together might go to the Pretty Polly [at the Curragh],” O’Brien said, “and this filly might go to the Irish Oaks, and then they both might head for the Arc.”