Chris Froome salutes Geraint Thomas after Sky teammate takes yellow jersey

p

• Thomas won stage 11 of the Tour de France to take overall lead

• Defending champion Froome moved up to second in standings

Geraint Thomas leads Team Sky teammate Chris Froome by 85 seconds.

Photograph: James Startt/Agence Zoom/Getty Images

Team Sky took control of the Tour de France in the high Alps with Geraint Thomas taking the yellow jersey of race leadership for the second time in his career, following a solo win at the Alpine ski station of La Rosière.

However, the Welshman’s closest rival may yet prove to be his teammate and defending Tour champion, Chris Froome, who pursued Thomas during the closing kilometres, distancing rivals in the process, but also moving up to second place overall.

There has been much talk of tensions between Thomas and Froome but after the finish on Wednesday they failed, publicly at least, to materialise. “It’s an amazing position for us,” Froome said. “Geraint’s in the form of his life and fully deserves it.

“I don’t think we quite expected that going into today’s stage. I think everyone probably expected Alpe d’Huez to be the more decisive stage, and it might very well still be, but it puts us in a fantastic position ahead of tomorrow’s stage [to Alpe d’Huez].”

Thomas now leads from Froome by almost a minute and a half, with the Dutch rider Tom Dumoulin in third place. “It’s unreal,” Thomas said after winning the stage. “I didn’t expect it at all. Obviously Froomey is the leader, he’s won six Grand Tours. It was more of an opportunity, more instinct for myself. It meant Froomey could follow behind so ideal scenario really.”

The Sky sports director, Nicolas Portal, said: “Froome is number one. I think everything worked pretty well. When the race ends like this the opportunities open. You are not changing the plan, you are adapting.”

Pressed further on who was Sky’s leader, Portal grew exasperated. “Guys, I’ve spent 20 minutes explaining this,” he said. “Froome is leader. He’s won six Grand Tours.”

For now at least Thomas, recent winner of the Critérium du Dauphiné, is toeing the company line. “Froomey knows how to win a three-week race,” he said. “For me now, whatever happens, it’s been a successful Tour. It’s an amazing feeling to win the stage and take the jersey. I’m super happy with that.”

“Obviously I’d love to stay up on the podium as long as possible but the main thing is winning and Froomey is our best chance. There’s still half the race to go.”