Sports quiz of the week: England v Netherlands, Gareth Bale and meat

p

p

Who hit the heights in London? Who scored at Wembley? And who collapsed?

Gareth Bale celebrates after scoring for Wales in their 6-0 win in China.

Photograph: AP

Ronald Koeman begins his tenure as the Netherlands manager against England this weekend. In which year did Koeman score the winning goal in a European Cup final at Wembley?

1988

1990

1992 Koeman scored from a free-kick in the 112th minute to give Barcelona a 1-0 win over Sampdoria.

1994

What was the score the last time England played the Netherlands in a competitive fixture?

England 0-1 Netherlands

England 4-1 Netherlands At Euro 96, when Alan Shearer and Teddy Sheringham scored two goals each to give England a glorious victory.

England 2-3 Netherlands

England 1-3 Netherlands

What happened for only the third time in rugby union history?

England lost a three games in a row

Ireland won a grand slam Ireland’s previous slams came in 1948 and 2009.

Romania qualified for a Rugby World Cup

Italy beat Scotland

Which team finished second in the Six Nations?

England

France

Ireland

Italy

Scotland

Wales England finished fifth. Oh dear.

Which player scored the most points in the tournament?

Jacob Stockdale

Maxime Machenaud Stockdale scored seven tries – a Six Nations record – but the France scrum-half scored more points overall.

Owen Farrell

Johnny Sexton

Gareth Bale scored his 27th, 28th and 29th goals for Wales against China this week to become his country’s all-time leading goalscorer. Whose record did he break?

Ryan Giggs

John Charles

Mark Hughes

Ian Rush Rush can comfort himself with the fact he remains Liverpool’s top goalscorer with 346 goals.

Complete this sequence: 6, 6, 16, 18, 18, 18, 23, 23, 27 …

29

58 England's score with their fall of wickets in the humiliating collapse against New Zealand

74

99

Who wants his opponent to take a lie detector test to prove he is telling the truth about Mexican meat?

Gennady Golovkin When Canelo Álvarez tested positive for the banned substance clenbuterol, he blamed meat contamination in Mexico. Golovkin, who is set to fight Álvarez in May, did not buy his excuse: “Again with the Mexican meat? Come on. It’s not Mexican meat. They’re using drugs and everybody is just trying to pretend it’s not happening. Check him on a lie detector and then we can find out everything. I eat Mexican food all the time and I’ve never had that problem."

Lewis Hamilton

Conor McGregor

Anthony Joshua

Southampton have only won the FA Cup once, in 1976. Which of this season’s semi-finalists did they overcome in the final?

Chelsea

Manchester United Southampton lost their first FA Cup final 4-0 to Bury in 1900. How things change.

Tottenham Hotspur

The F1 season begins this weekend. Which race is returning to the calendar for the first time in a decade?

French Grand Prix The oldest Grand Prix race, first run in 1906, is back.

Hungarian Grand Prix

Spanish Grand Prix

Russian Grand Prix

You got…

Challenge your friends