Tiger Woods in frame with need for creativity at parched Carnoustie

T he evidence of one of golf’s greatest stories lies deep in Carnoustie. Natural Scottish reticence provides the explanation for that. If Ben Hogan, one of the finest players of all time, had produced one-off heroics to triumph closer to his Texas home in 1953, it is a reasonable bet that streets, holidays, schools and monuments would bear his name.

One of the precious few reference points here is the 6th hole that bears Hogan’s name. A then course-record 68 was produced in the final round as Hogan claimed the Claret Jug by four shots. That ultimately proved one of the less noteworthy aspects in a unique win.

This marked Hogan’s Open debut and the continuation of a spectacular year in which he also won the Masters and US Open. “I don’t know when I’ll be back,” Hogan said in his parting speech. “But I’ll try to come next year.” Hogan was never to appear at the Open, or in Scotland, again.

Myths abound. What is known is that Hogan, never a keen flier, did not take kindly to week-long boat trips across the Atlantic or competing for less money than he could generate in the United States. Arnold Palmer’s Open success of 1961 popularised the event among Americans; 57 years on they dominate the game’s major scene.

Hogan’s Carnoustie glory was remarkable because of the backdrop against which it was achieved. In 1949 he had survived a serious collision between his car and a bus.

Four years later and halfway across the world Hogan had to switch hotels because of the unavailability of an en-suite bathroom. One consequence of his road accident was the necessity to soak his legs every night to prevent swelling.

Just as Hogan emerged from the wreckage of his own vehicle, so Tiger Woods continues to do likewise in respect of his career. Even Carnoustie would struggle to keep matters of a low-key nature should Woods lift the Claret Jug for a fourth time on Sunday evening. The town, as well as the golf scene, is willing him to do it; there are wider benefits, after all.

There has to be a point at which the “blessing” Woods believes he has been given to continue on-course pursuits makes way for ferocious competitive spirit. There was a glimpse of the latter in the Open buildup as a video of Woods speaking at a corporate event emerged.

“The only thing I can control is I,” Woods said. “Now, if I do this more efficiently than you, if you get intimidated, that’s your own fucking issue.”

That Woods used to intimidate fellow players is a given. Whether he can during this, his latest but most promising, renaissance remains to be seen. How both Woods and other competitors would react should the 14-times major champion find himself in the Open frame at the business end of round four would be utterly fascinating to observe.

Woods is a key part of the Open narrative beyond his core status. Strategy is not just vital on this scorched Carnoustie turf. It is the source of widespread debate. On one side is the theory, as perpetuated by Rory McIlroy, that wispy rough allows long drivers such as the Northern Irishman himself to be bold. On the other, Woods has insisted shorter clubs from tees represent the most logical way to attack a fiery links.

That creativity, particularly in respect of ball flight, will be required points towards Woods. That the 42-year-old sees little need to produce the longest club in his bag is also a positive; Woods’s driving has been woefully wayward at times this year. His win at Hoylake in 2006, the last time an Open was played against such a burnt backdrop, is also pertinent. At some stage it will become legitimate to ask whether Woods can ever joust at the summit of major leaderboards if he toils when matters are in his favour. Here they unquestionably are.

Woods and Hogan share an essential trait if seeking to tame Carnoustie: tenacity. Jordan Spieth’s downturn in fortunes since prevailing at Royal Birkdale 12 months ago has been most curious because of its root cause: bad putting.

Spieth’s capacity to rise from the ashes was apparent at the last Open. It would, therefore, be folly to ignore his Carnoustie chances on account of a poor run of form. Patrick Reed, the Masters champion, has such a wonderful recent record in majors that Open victory is closer to probable than possible.

In this, a Ryder Cup year, European golf would love Henrik Stenson, Justin Rose or Sergio García to stem the American flow. García has a score to settle at Carnoustie after play-off defeat in 2007. McIlroy, whose shackle-free plan promises to be quite a spectacle, is overdue another major win.

Lost in the mêlée of McIlroy critique is that he has been first, fifth and fourth in his last three Open starts. It is a sign of the 29-year-old’s talent level that the latter two are regarded as disappointments.

One beauty of links golf resonates in the ability for more senior hands to mix it with – or outplay – the young bucks. Ian Poulter’s bounce back from the brink of golfing oblivion renders him worthy of attention just as the continuing form of his fellow Englishman Tommy Fleetwood has taught bookmakers to tread carefully.

Hogan is not the only member of golfing royalty to have a Carnoustie Open to his name. Tommy Armour, Henry Cotton, Gary Player and Tom Watson pieced together their own fairytales in this otherwise unremarkable corner of the North Sea coast.

Hogan had no interest whatsoever in keeping the dream alive but 156 players will awaken on Thursday with precisely that ambition.