Serena Williams the one to beat at Wimbledon whatever rankings say

F ew athletes in the history of sport have rushed towards drama with as much enthusiasm and panache as Serena Williams has. So, when the extraordinary American cancelled her pre-Wimbledon press conference at the last minute on Saturday afternoon to go to a polo match with Prince Harry and Meghan, the reaction around the All England Club was one of resignation rather than surprise.

Williams was a guest at the royal wedding in Windsor in May and the three of them – along with various courtiers and celebrity chums – were back there again to watch some polo on a glorious afternoon when, critics might point out, she might have been better employed attending to her day job.

She has become close friends with the Duchess of Sussex, apparently, and her own regal bearing can rarely have been so pronounced as in this minor snub to the media before her first appearance at the tournament since she won her seventh singles title here in 2016.

Williams is a mother now, and grateful for the seedings committee’s decision to give her the 25th place among the protected 32.

Her career has been a blizzard of aces, soaring triumphs and swooping lows, rows and celebrations, controversy and excitement – but, underpinning it all, are the numbers.

For Roger Federer, the number that matters is one. The Swiss – who trails the American 23-20 in singles slam titles, and turns 37 in August, seven weeks before her – told the Wall Street Journal: “I came up through Switzerland with the federation, she did it with her dad and her sister. It’s an amazing story unto itself, and then she became one of the greatest, if not the greatest tennis player of all time.”

From one Goat to another, that is as definitive a judgment as is possible in sport. The players who have to confront her on court are similarly effusive, if reluctant to embrace the concept while still in active rivalry with her. Dominika Cibulkova, who was bounced out of the seedings to accommodate her return, is not her greatest fan at the moment. Elsewhere, there is awe.

On Monday she begins her campaign with what should be a routine assignment against the 27-year-old Dutch left-hander Arantxa Rus, who is ranked 107 in the world – 76 places above Williams. Only three active players in the Open era have not lost in the first round here: Williams in 17 appearances, Maria Sharapova in 13 and Agnieszka Radwanska in 12. It is unlikely Rus is going to change that.

Serena Williams’s grand slam record is formidable. She is  the only tennis player in  history – male or female – to have won singles titles at least six times in three of the four major tournaments, and the only player to have won two grand slams seven times each:  at Wimbledon and the Australian Open. Her Wimbledon triumphs:

2002 v Venus Williams 7-6(4), 6-3

2003 v Venus Williams 4-6, 6-4, 6-2

2009 v Venus Williams 7-6(3), 6-2

2010 v Vera Zvonareva 6-3, 6-2

2012 v Agnieszka Radwanska 6-1, 5-7, 6-2

2015 v Garbiñe Muguruza 6-4, 6-4

2016 v Angelique Kerber 7-5, 6-3

Among those closer to Williams in ability and realistic ambition, she reigns with authority. Of players still competing, nobody else has double-digit slams. Her sister Venus owns seven, Sharapova five. That is a gap as convincing in its dominance as Donald Bradman had over every batsman who has ever played. And only Venus and Sharapova can boast double-digit appearances in finals, with 16 and 10 respectively. Serena has been to the final Sunday of majors 28 times.

More numbers. But, as Martina Navratilova said on Saturday: “Serena’s ranking is completely irrelevant. Whatever the computer says, Serena isn’t really the 183rd best player in the world. As everyone knows, she only has that low ranking because she is a new mother, with this the fourth tournament of her comeback. She could be the world No 1,000 and I would still put her as my favourite for the Venus Rosewater dish.”

It remains an oddity that the one-on-one career battle she is best known for, against Sharapova, is no rivalry at all. She wipes the floor with the Russian. And what is eternally admirable about their strange relationship is the mutual respect involved in each of the clashes.

After defeating Williams in the Wimbledon final and the WTA Tour Finals in 2004, not once in taking 18 subsequent beatings has Sharapova given up; she has fought for every point to the last scream in her lungs. And, although the enmity between them is obvious, Williams has deep respect for her – as a competitor, at least.

Williams has reached three of her slam finals by saving match points in the semi-finals: against Kim Clijsters in Melbourne in 2003, in Australia again two years later against Sharapova and at Wimbledon in 2009 against Elena Dementieva. Nobody in the history of the game has achieved that hat-trick of rescued lost causes.

And now she has to fight again, to prove to the sport and the world that, as a contented mother with a hinterland more interesting than any other player, she is still worth her place. She would not do this unless she loved it, because it brings her nearly as much angst as joy. When she withdrew at the last moment from a fourth-round match at the French Open with Sharapova because of a pectoral muscle injury, there was much harrumphing and raising of eyebrows. Yet who would doubt that she did not relish that prospect? She has never shied away from a challenge, on or off the court.

When she failed to make it to her press conference on Saturday, the immediate suspicion in the media room was that the injury had returned. It would seem not – but one informed observer says she has done well to even be back competing at such a high level, given what she has endured before, during and since giving birth to Olympia last September.

Prof Greg Whyte, a sports scientist and author of Bump it Up, a study of exercise and pregnancy, told the Observer that having an emergency C-section birth would have inflicted considerable physical trauma on her body, the effects of which would take months to abate.

“It is very complicated and aggressive surgery,” he said. “It involves cutting through muscle and the significant shifting of internal organs. That is why she has been wearing the suppression garments [that she had at the French Open but is unlikely to be allowed at Wimbledon]. While there is a good physiological rationale for wearing something that supports the body, the clothing is also a psychological comfort blanket for her.”

He added that Williams represents a select band of elite female athletes who have been able to return to their sport after pregnancy and perform at previous levels. “In recent times there have been outstanding role models in Jessica Ennis-Hill, Jo Pavey and Paula Radcliffe. Serena also has to cope with the baby blues, which is aided by a hormone called relaxin, which leads to laxity of the joints. It helps the expansion of the pelvis and change of body shape.

“But Serena’s stability and power will have been affected by this, and to get it back takes time. I think she is absolutely inspirational, as are all athletes and mothers who come back to sport. It’s incredible. It’s something men will never know about.”

And now there are more numbers for her to crunch. When Williams won her last slam – in Melbourne 18 months ago – she moved to within one trophy of matching Margaret Court’s all-time record of 24 majors.

Had the small matter of pregnancy and subsequent physical struggles not intervened, she would be a raging favourite over the next fortnight to draw level with the Australian but, as John McEnroe said recently, she should at least be regarded among the top 10 contenders, whatever her seeding.