LeSean McCoy denies allegations of domestic, child, animal and drug abuse

p

Running back accused of assaulting girlfriend in Instagram post

Buffalo player says claims are ‘totally baseless and offensive’

LeSean McCoy (left) has played for the Buffalo Bills and Philadelphia Eagles.

Photograph: Steve Mitchell/USA Today Sports

LeSean McCoy has responded to serious allegations contained in an Instagram post.

A friend of Delicia Cordon, who has been McCoy’s girlfriend, accused the Buffalo Bills running back of domestic abuse alongside a picture of a badly bruised woman she alleges is Cordon. The post also claims McCoy beat his son and dog and used performance-enhancing drugs. The post has since been deleted.

On Tuesday, McCoy said the claims were untrue. “For the record, the totally baseless and offensive claims made against me today on social media are completely false,” he wrote on Instagram. “Further more, I have not had any direct contact with any of the people involved in months.”

According to Deadspin, police said that Cordon was the victim of a home invasion earlier this month in Georgia, after which a female was taken to hospital requiring treatment.

“The preliminary investigation indicates that this residence was specifically targeted by the suspect or suspects, and not a random incident,” Milton County police said in a statement. “When officers arrived they found one victim who had been physically assaulted by a lone intruder. During the altercation, the suspect demanded specific items from the victim.”

The Bills and the NFL both say they are reviewing the matter.

A number of high-profile NFL players have been involved in domestic violence allegations. New York Giants kicker Josh Brown admitted in 2016 to abusing his former wife while Ray Rice’s career was effectively ended after he was caught punching his fiancee on camera in 2014. Greg Hardy’s NFL career also fell apart after allegations he assaulted his partner. He is now a mixed martial arts fighter.