Jamie Murray reaches mixed doubles final with Victoria Azarenka

For the second year in a row Jamie Murray will lead Britain’s hopes of glory on the final weekend at Wimbledon after he and Victoria Azarenka reached the final of the mixed doubles. The pair, a last-minute entry into the tournament, ended the run of the all-British pairing of Jay Clarke and Harriet Dart 6-2, 6-2 and on Sunday they will take on the 11th seeds, Alexander Peya of Austria and Nicole Melichar of the US, for the title.

Murray certainly knows how to pick his partners. In 2007 he joined forces with Jelena Jankovic of Serbia to win his first grand slam title and last year he and Martina Hingis sauntered to victory.

“I wasn’t going to play in the tournament in either year,” Murray said. “Last year Martina asked me a few days before and I couldn’t pass that up. Then when Bruno [Soares, his men’s doubles partner] texted me and said do you want to play with Azarenka, I was like ‘er’, because I wasn’t going to play. This year I was going to give my all for the men’s [doubles] and have no regrets. Then I was like ‘shit, this is a great opportunity.’ I just hope we can go one better now.”

Apart from facing a couple of break points in the opening game Murray and Azarenka were on top throughout, never in danger, despite the best efforts of Clarke and Dart, whose run to the semi-finals has been the best week of their careers. Azarenka, a former world No 1 and a mixed doubles gold medallist at Wimbledon in 2012 with Max Mirnyi, played superbly. For her the run to the final has been important, getting matches under her belt after a custody battle over her child left her unable to play outside the US for the early part of this year.

“I’m just very happy that we’re still playing. We were 5-1 down [in the final set] in one match, it feels like we’ve played so much,” she said. “Matches is just money for me right now, in both meanings. We’re having a lot of fun. I think it’s my first Wimbledon final in any main event so that’s really exciting. I won doubles here twice in juniors so hope I can make that step.”

Five years ago Jack Draper made a special trip to Wimbledon to watch his childhood hero, Andy Murray, go for glory in the men’s final against Novak Djokovic. It was a day and match that will live in his memory but, after the way he played yesterday, the 16-year-old may one day get to experience something similar himself.

Trying to become the first Briton to win the juniors here since Laura Robson in 2008, but the first junior boy since Stanley Matthews Jr in 1962, Draper played a four-hour 24-minute epic with Nicolas Mejia of Colombia, finally clinching a 7-6, 6-7, 19-17 win on his 10th match point.

The first of them came in the second set, the other nine in the final set and all of them were on the Mejia serve, with the Colombian more than playing his part in a remarkable match. At the end, after Draper put a smash away into the open court, he fell to his knees, banging the grass in elation.

After a warm embrace at the net Mejia sat in tears on his chair; when the pair exited the court Draper threw an arm round his beaten opponent.

Draper, the son of the former LTA chief executive Roger Draper, will now take on the top seed, Tseng Chun-hsin, the French Open junior champion, who is into his third grand slam final of the year.

There could yet be more British success after the defending champions, Alfie Hewett and Gordon Reid, reached the final of the wheelchair doubles. The Britons held off the Argentinian-Japanese combination of Gustavo Fernández and Shinji Kunieda 6-4, 3-6, 7-6 (3).

The result was something of a consolation for Hewett, who missed out on a place in the final of the singles event when he was beaten 6-2, 6-4 by Sweden’s Stefan Olsen.