Similarities of Chris Froome now to Alberto Contador in 2011 are clear

A s Karl Marx said, history repeats itself, first as tragedy, second as farce. Which one the 2018 Tour de France turns out to be remains to be seen. Chris Froome, the defending champion, travels to the Vendée this week aiming for a place in the record books: a record-equalling fifth Tour win, a straight run of four Grand Tour victories out of four, and the first Giro d’Italia-Tour double in 20 years. It should be a statistician’s delight but it is also a legal bunfight, with Froome’s adverse analytical finding (AAF) for salbutamol still in abeyance.

Unless the verdict falls this coming week, cycling has been here before. It was in the Vendée in 2011 where a beleaguered Alberto Contador started the Tour de France as defending champion, on the back of a Giro d’Italia win, with a possible anti-doping ban hanging over him. He met a hostile reception, with a chorus of booing when he was presented to the crowds at the pre-Tour presentation. It is to be hoped that Froome is more gracefully received.

There are differences between the two cases. The Froome case is not a straightforward positive for a banned substance as Contador’s clenbuterol saga was; the asthma drug salbutamol is in a different category as a restricted substance, subject to certain limits. Contrary to the recently expressed views of the five-times winner Bernard Hinault, Froome is not “positive”, unless his explanation for being over the limit were to be rejected.

But the other similarities with 2011 are too obvious and uncomfortable to ignore. In 2011 the Observer’s Tour de France preview included these words: “As the massive favourite, Contador would be the man on whom the success of the Tour hinges even under normal circumstances. July should be spent applauding his dominance or thrilling as he falters. As it is, July will be spent wondering what will happen in August … he could lose a Tour and a Giro and his reputation.” Substitute “Vuelta” – the race in which Froome’s AAF occurred – for the second mention of Tour, and Froome for Contador, and there is no further need to rewrite those sentences.

Contador was able to race only because the court of arbitration for sport put his appeal hearing back two months; similarly resolution of the Froome case has become increasingly drawn out. At first it was expected before the Tour and there is still time for it to be settled at least initially, to the extent the organiser of the Vuelta has begun making worried noises.

Since the AAF was leaked in November Froome has been adamant he will clear his name, and that the world will see him in a fresh light when his full explanation for the high test reading is made public. Thus far, Sky have said they have “utmost confidence” he stayed within the permissible limits while Froome has said he was following doctor’s advice after his asthma worsened – and the chances are his final defence will be more comprehensive than Contador’s claim that the tiny amount of clenbuterol found in his urine was due to a contaminated steak brought to him on the rest day of the 2010 Tour.

One difference is in the way the cycling milieu has viewed the two cases. In 2011 the UCI was slack in getting the Contador case under way and called for him to be received with tolerance; in contrast the current UCI head, David Lappartient, has said that in his view Froome should have ruled himself out of racing until the case is settled. Froome’s view has been consistent: the rules permit him to race and he has done nothing wrong, so he should race.

Not all his fellow cyclists see it that way, though. In 2011 there were few prepared to put their heads over the parapet about the Contador case – Bradley Wiggins being an exception – but there has been heavyweight opposition to the way Froome and Team Sky have chosen to plough on. While Hinault has preferred to ignore the subtleties of the case – and Sky’s response has been the diplomatic equivalent of lead piping – the sprinter Marcel Kittel and the 2017 Giro d’Italia winner, Tom Dumoulin, have been more measured.

“People are annoyed and I do not like it either,” said Kittel. “I find it difficult to say whether or not Froome should start. The possibility is there, and his team uses that. But Sky has wanted to be transparent since its existence and want to practise a pure sport. They had the opportunity, in this case, to underline those words and keep Froome aside. They have not, however.”

Romain Bardet, a podium finisher in the past two Tours, was more damning, saying recently: “If I were in [Froome’s] position I would just not consider starting the Tour de France and I would be ashamed to be linked to such a case.” In January, the Ag2R leader looked ahead to the possibility that Froome’s case might not be resolved by July, saying if the Team Sky leader rode the Tour “there would be derision – it would be a farce”.

Put aside the wondering about what will happen in August – or September or whenever a resolution comes – and the Tour is potentially more enthralling than usual, with perhaps the strongest set of challengers Froome has faced to date: perennials such as Nairo Quintana, Vincenzo Nibali and Romain Bardet, relative newcomers such as Adam Yates and Dumoulin, wildcards such as Rigoberto Urán and Richie Porte.

There are grounds for wondering how Froome’s form might be affected by racing the Giro but they are slender, as usually he and Sky manage their buildup to perfection.

The Tour organisers have weaponised the elements that have worked well in recent years: short mountain stages, a more than symbolic run across the pavé of northern France, new climbs and a hilltop finish in the first week. There are more cobbles than usual packed into a smaller distance, briefer and tougher mountain days in both the Alps and Pyrenees, a potential pitfall in the Pic de Nore in southern France on the penultimate Sunday, and two ascents of the Mûr de Bretagne on day six.

The upshot is a route and a field that offers Froome a serious test. However, as it was for Contador in 2011, the greater challenge is off the bike and it is not to be found anywhere on the roads of France.