The big sports quiz of the year 2017

p

Real Madrid won five trophies, Anthony Joshua became a world champion and Conor McGregor became a boxer. Were you paying attention to the little details?

Anthony Joshua, the All Blacks and Lions captains, Real Madrid winning the Champions League and Conor McGregor landing a shot on Floyd Mayweather.

Composite: Sportsfile via Getty Images, Reuters, AFP

Which of these footballers retired with fewer than 100 international caps?

Andrea Pirlo

Dirk Kuyt

Francesco Totti Pirlo won 116; Alonso won 114; Lahm won 113; Lampard won 106; Kuyt won 104; and Totti won 58.

Frank Lampard

Philipp Lahm

Xabi Alonso

Where did Usain Bolt finish in the final race of his career?

First

Second

Third

He didn’t finish Bolt pulled up injured in the 4x100m relay at the World Championships in London.

Who is this?

Rafa Nadal

Andy Murray At the Australian Open in Melbourne.

Nick Kyrgios

Stan Wawrinka

Who was the winner when two double Olympic champions met in the ring as professionals?

Anthony Joshua

Billy Joe Saunders

Vasyl Lomachenko Two-time Olympic champion Lomachenko was victorious against fellow two-time Olympic champion Rigondeaux when they fought in December.

Guillermo Rigondeaux

Which football team won a competitive match for the first time in 13 years?

Andorra Andorra won a World Cup qualifier against Hungary, a team that made it to the World Cup final in 1938 and 1954.

Luxembourg

Lichtenstein

Gibraltar

Which team won 18 matches in a row before losing in Dublin?

Real Madrid

Celtic

The All Blacks

England’s rugby union team England won 18 in a row before their defeat to Ireland in Dublin in the final match of the Six Nations. Iain Henderson scored Ireland's try.

How many points did England score in the Rugby League World Cup final?

None Australia won 6-0.

One

Five

Ten

In which city was this photo taken?

New York

Dubai

London At the ATP World Tour finals, where Grigor Dimitrov beat David Goffin in the final.

Abu Dhabi

The first finished 30–15. The second finished 21–24. What about the third?

22–16

3–12

15–15 The results from the three Tests between the All Blacks and the Lions in New Zealand.

31–31

Which tennis player made it to three singles grand slam finals this year?

Venus Williams

Roger Federer

Rafa Nadal He won two of them – at the US Open and French Open – but was beaten by Federer in the Australian Open final.

Garbiñe Muguruza

Complete this Warren Gatland quote: "I am a happy … "

Kiwi

Idiot

Hunter

Clown Gatland took a lot of stick after the Lions lost the first Test in New Zealand but he had the last laugh.

Who is wearing this boot?

Harry Kane

Lionel Messi

Alexis Sánchez

Cristiano Ronaldo His daughters are called Eva Maria and Alana Martina.

Which of the four clubs that made it to the Champions League semi-finals this year have not been managed by Claudio Ranieri?

Atlético Madrid

Monaco

Juventus

Real Madrid The team that won it.

Where did Lewis Hamilton have his worst result of his season (a ninth-place finish) and the best result of his season (securing the drivers’ title)?

Mexico Hamilton has now won four drivers’ titles. Only Juan Manuel Fangio and Michael Schumacher have won more.

Brazil

Great Britain

Monaco

England didn't lose a competitive football match in 2017. Neither did…

Wales

Republic of Ireland

Northern Ireland

Scotland Not that it saved Gordon Strachan.

Which athlete held three different world records in the same event on the same day in July?

Mo Farah

Usain Bolt

Adam Peaty Peaty broke his own 50m breaststroke world record in the morning and then bettered it later that day.

Jonnie Peacock

Who finally won after 73 attempts?

LA Dodgers

Atlanta Falcons

Sergio García García had competed in 73 majors – and finished second on four occasions – before he won the Masters in April.

Houston Astros

Who is this?

Jodie Taylor

Heather Knight After winning the Women's Cricket World Cup final at Lord's.

Sarah Hunter

Anya Shrubsole

Complete this sequence: Joe Cordina, Katie Taylor, Luke Campbell, Scott Quigg …

Tony Bellew

Floyd Mayweather

Anthony Joshua The boxers who won at Wembley Stadium on 29 April 2017.

Wladimir Klitschko

Who came out on top when two French football teams met at the Cardiff City Stadium in June?

Lyon Lyon beat Paris Saint-Germain in the Women’s Champions League final.

France

Paris Saint-Germain

Marseille

According to the UAE Football Association’s guidelines, what was “unethical” about Asamoah Gyan?

His goal celebrations

His boots

His tattoos

His hair Gyan was on loan at Al Ahbi, who are based in Dubai.

Who described their job as “90%!a(MISSING)ggravation and 10%!t(MISSING)op satisfaction – and you have to give everything in your life for that"?

Adam Peaty

Floyd Mayweather

Arsène Wenger Wenger also told Arsenal fans: "I dedicate 99%!o(MISSING)f my lifetime to try to make you happy. Looking at what happened today, it is not easy."

Nicola Adams

Where is this?

Sydney

New York

Shanghai

Huddersfield The John Smith's Stadium to be precise.

Carlos Correa proposed to his girlfriend on 1 November. What else did he do that day?

Won the Superbike World Championship

Won the World Series She said yes.

Beat Novak Djokovic at tennis

Bought Barnsley FC.

Who said: "It is impossible to please the Greeks and Trojans. Neither did Jesus please everyone"?

Martin O’Neill

Sam Allardyce

Joe Root

Emanuel Santos The man who sculpted Cristiano Ronaldo.

Who is this?

David de Gea

Gianluigi Buffon

Sergio Romero Romero wears the same gloves "for around four or five games – after that, the latex starts to go and they’re not the same, so I swap them for a fresh pair."

Iker Casillas

Who was employed for 77 days in 2017, having been employed for 85 days in 2016?

Alan Pardew

Frank de Boer 85 days with Inter and 77 days with Crystal Palace

Sam Allardyce

Slaven Bilic

Who completes the set: Sergio García, Brooks Koepka, Justin Thomas and...

Rory McIlroy

Dustin Johnson

Jordan Spieth The four golf major winners in 2017.

Danny Willett

Who is this?

Alastair Cook

Stuart Broad

Ben Stokes This picture was taken in Barbados, not Australia.

Jimmy Anderson

Real Madrid became the first team to retain the Champions League. Who were the first team to retain the European Cup?

Nottingham Forest

Real Madrid Real Madrid won the first five European Cups.

Liverpool

Celtic

Who became like Frank Lampard, Dixie Dean, Thierry Henry, Luther Blissett and Jimmy Greaves?

Neymar and Ousmane Dembélé

Wayne Rooney and Sergio Agüero They became the all-time top goalscorers for an English football club.

John Terry and Brendan Rodgers

Gareth Southgate and Gordon Strachan

Who decided to accept a job offer when his “dog barked twice”?

Harry Redknapp

Jupp Heynckes When speaking about his decision to go back to Bayern Munich, Jupp Heynckes said: "My wife and my daughter said I should do it. My dog also barked twice, so that meant I should do it."

England couldn't do it in Brisbane, Adelaide or Perth. Where did Bangladesh do it?

Sydney

Canberra

Dhaka Beat the Australia cricket team a Test match.

Hobart

Who are like “nutella and shit”?

Pep Guardiola and José Mourinho

Steve Smith and Ben Stokes

Rino Gattuso and Andrea Pirlo So says Gattuso, who did not deem himself fit to be compared to his former team-mate.

Claudio Bravo and Ederson

Slovakia did it in 2009. Bosnia and Herzegovina did it in 2013. Who did it in 2017?

Chile

Iceland and Panama They qualified for the World Cup for the first time.

Denmark and Switzerland

North Korea

Who is this?

Michael van Gerwen

Phil Taylor

Martin Adams Martin "Wolfie" Adams.

Gary Anderson

In which country did an Earthquake exact revenge on a Jackal?

Russia

The US Léo “the Earthquake” Santa Cruz defeated Carl “the Jackal” Frampton in January in Las Vegas.

Northern Ireland

Mexico

Which of cycling's three Grand Tours started in France?

Giro d’Italia

Tour de France

Vuelta a España The Tour started in Germany and the Vuelta started in France.

Name the "boxer".

Gennady Golovkin

Conor McGregor Just before he lost against Floyd Mayweather in August.

Canelo Álvarez

Manny Pacquiao

What was unusual about Ali Farag and Nour El Tayeb winning US Open squash titles on the same day in October?

They were professional tennis players last year

They are married Neither had won a major title before.

They are siblings

They are both in their 40s

You got…

Challenge your friends