Team Sky’s coaching guru launches staunch defence of Chris Froome

Tim Kerrison, Chris Froome’s long-term coach, has attacked the growing criticism in the French media towards the Team Sky rider in the buildup to this year’s Tour de France following the latest attack on Froome from the retired five-times Tour winner Bernard Hinault.

“If things are presented in a way that incites or sensationalises, or fuels anger or resentment towards Chris, then I don’t think that’s very responsible,” Kerrison said. “I think fair treatment in the media is a responsible requirement to ensure the riders’ safety.”

Hinault, who as the Tour’s master of ceremonies spent many years shaking Froome warmly by the hand as he presented him with the race leader’s yellow jersey, suggested that his peers should strike if the defending champion starts this year’s race, which begins in the Vendée on 7 July.

“The peloton is too nice,” Hinault told French media of the controversy of Froome’s adverse analytical finding (AAF) for salbutamol. “Others have been sanctioned, but they won’t sanction him because they say it was an abnormal control? It’s banned and that’s it. The rules are the same for everybody.”

Speaking to the Guardian in Monaco, Kerrison, the performance guru behind Froome’s startling victory in last month’s Giro d’Italia, is adamant that the continuing scepticism towards Froome, further fuelled by his still unresolved AAF, is unfounded.

“I’m very confident that he is innocent,” the Australian said. “There have never been any question marks for me.”

Team Sky also issued a statement on Thursday morning, describing Hinault’s comments as “disappointing”, “factually incorrect” and “irresponsible and ill-informed”.

Froome has had a bodyguard for some time but Kerrison admits Team Sky’s staff and riders are steeling themselves for a potentially hostile reception when the Tour begins.

“We have been talking for a long time about safety and security and we had a couple of BSkyB’s security team come to spend time with us, just to advise us on how we operate and can improve our safety and security at races.

“Our experience of riding in France and our experience of the public has been fantastic. But we also know there will also be a small part of the crowd who will be hostile and a few people who are haters and are particularly hostile.

“But you can address the core problem as well, which is the way some things are presented in particular sections of the media.”

With Froome and his team reputedly locked in combat with the World Anti-Doping Agency over the viability of the salbutamol finding and ASO, the promoter of the Tour de France, watching from the sidelines, there is now almost no chance of the stalemate surrounding Froome being resolved before the start of the 2018 Tour. That leaves Froome free to race, yet even Kerrison bemoaned the current impasse. “Guilty or innocent, it shouldn’t take this long to resolve,” Kerrison said. “If he’s found to be innocent it just shouldn’t take the months and months that it has done to resolve the situation.”

The scepticism that has followed Froome and his performances since his first Tour win in 2013 became a runaway train this spring following the publication of the parliamentary report by the digital, culture, media and sport select committee into anti-doping, which questioned the credibility of the team principal, Dave Brailsford, attacked the team’s medical record keeping and labelled their use of therapeutic use exemptions unethical.

Then came an extraordinary Giro d’Italia, in which Froome reversed a disastrous start to the three‑week tour with a race-winning ride through the Italian Alps that left his peers stunned and his detractors incensed.

“We have never seen a ride like that from him in a race,” acknowledged Kerrison of Froome’s lone attack over the gravel ascent of the Colle delle Finestre that took him decisively into the race lead.

“Ultimately it was Chris’s idea to do that. He knew the Finestre climb and despite what people say about his bike handling skills, they’re actually pretty good and he doesn’t mind a bit of dirt road. We could see some cracks among the opponents. We knew the climb and we knew that if they cracked on it, that they could lose a lot of time.”

Kerrison insists Froome’s reversal of fortune in Italy is not suspicious, but plausible. “The first half of his race was affected by his crash [in Israel], and less than brilliant sleep, but all of those things have a short‑term effect. If there’s no serious injury then he’s not going to be suffering from it two weeks later, which was when he started to come into form.”

Froome’s performance polarised cycling and the reaction encapsulated why the sport continues to battle for credibility. Kerrison, meanwhile, is developing a deck of detailed information aimed at persuading sceptics that Froome’s ride was credible.

“Other than trying to help to inform and understand what went into that performance there’s only so much we can do. But I can absolutely guarantee that there was no illegal performance enhancement,” he said.

“We want to be working with some of the world’s best athletes and trying to make them better. We want to break into new territory with them, so incredible and unbelievable are the kind of words that I am proud to hear people use.”

Yet Kerrison knows that such language has a double edge. “It definitely does. We’re well aware of the history and that people have trouble believing what they’re seeing at times. I think it’s not unreasonable for people to question what they’re seeing.

“But I know that the whole peloton is riding faster than it was a couple of years ago. From what I can see in the data we have and the climb rates, if our riders don’t continue to improve they will be overtaken by the next generation of young riders.

“We are nowhere near the limits of human capability. A lot of the performances from a decade ago were enhanced but they were also neglected in other ways. Resources were spent in one area and not in legitimate performance enhancement. Now they are.

“My objective is to keep us ahead of the curve. I know that the performances we’re doing now aren’t going to cut it in two or three years’ time. There is a constant evolution in performance, with equipment, engineering, our knowledge of physiology, how to get the best through training and nutrition.”

After winning six Grand Tours, Froome, now training in the French Alps at the Isola 2000 ski resort before heading to the Tour’s Grand Départ, has developed a thick skin, but the suggestion that he now seems almost immune to scepticism brings a sharp response from Kerrison. “That doesn’t make it right though,” he said. “Chris is human and it’s only natural that he feels a sense of injustice over the way he’s been treated or reported. But when it’s time to focus on his performance, he’s uniquely good at putting all that to one side and delivering.”