Josh Woods’s last-minute drop goal gives Wigan victory over Warrington

p

Wigan 13-12 Warrington Kevin Sinfield returns to Leeds as director of rugby

Josh Woods and his Wigan teammates celebrate after the late drop goal.

Photograph: Magi Haroun/REX/Shutterstock

You suspect there will be many more memorable moments in the career of Josh Woods but, in only his seventh senior appearance for Wigan, this one will take some beating.

The latest product of Wigan’s production line has been thrust in at the deep end, tasked with replacing the England stand-off George Williams while keeping Wigan’s title challenge on track. Whatever happens next, Woods will never forget the drop goal with seconds remaining that handed Wigan a win they may look back on as decisive in the race for the play-offs.

It looked as though the spoils would be shared courtesy of a former Wigan great. Josh Charnley’s try with three minutes remaining levelled the scores at 12-12, handing Stefan Ratchford the chance to kick Warrington ahead for the first time from the touchline.

Just as he and Bryson Goodwin had done earlier, Ratchford pushed his attempt wide: allowing Woods his chance to secure victory in the final seconds. “He’s a cool player, he’s very skilful,” said his coach, Shaun Wane.

Woods’ moment of brilliance means second-placed Wigan are four points ahead of Warrington. As the season approaches its final furlong, while Wigan remain unlikely to mount a challenge capable of overhauling the Super League leaders St Helens, the odds on a home semi-final are shortening.

Wigan looked as though they would rue failing to add to the eight-point lead they established by half-time. Tries by Tom Davies and Liam Paisley either side of Toby King’s try made it 12-4 at the break.

Prolonged pressure from the visitors bore fruit heading into the final quarter when Tom Lineham scored but Warrington were again off-target with the goal, Ratchford missing this time. Charnley’s dramatic finish in the corner set up a grandstand finish in which Woods nervelessly stepped forward to settle proceedings.

Meanwhile Kevin Sinfield has described the opportunity to return to Leeds as too good to resist after being appointed as their director of rugby in a radical shake-up of the Super League champions’ senior management.

Leeds, who sacked Brian McDermott on Monday after his eight seasons in charge, have moved swiftly with Sinfield returning to the club where he spent his entire 19-year playing career that ended in 2015. The 37-year-old will oversee the club’s rugby operation, with the former Bradford coach James Lowes appointed as first‑team coach.

“I don’t think you get many opportunities to join the biggest club in the game,” Sinfield said. “I’m delighted to be back; the role is everything I want it to be. It’s a dream job.”