Lewis Hamilton hoping for World Cup boost before French Grand Prix

Lewis Hamilton has admitted Sunday’s World Cup match between England and Panama could be a distraction to his preparations for the French Grand Prix, which has itself been delayed to avoid a clash with the football.

The British driver is a passionate England fan and said he will be watching the match but was optimistic that the side have every chance to ensure he starts the race buoyed after a victory.

The start of qualifying and the race have been put back an hour to accommodate the 1pm kick-off times, with qualifying set to be finished on Saturday before Hamilton’s title rival Sebastian Vettel has the chance to see how Germany fare in their crucial match against Sweden. The British driver had a poor weekend at the last round in Canada, where his fifth place to Vettel’s win converted his 14-point championship lead to a single point deficit.

He has his work cut out at the Paul Ricard circuit but said he would have to divide his attention. “It will be a little bit harder to focus on the race because we will be watching the game,” he said. “My engineers will be trying to keep an eye on both things at the same time, as will I.”

He was also familiar with the endless optimism of England fans. “Whenever this tournament comes along you always are hoping for something special to happen for England,” he said. “In my lifetime it has not been great for us. We have a good group of boys, a good team.

“I feel like I am very patriotic and am very proud to be a Brit. To be at the top of a sport and the one raising the flag – hopefully up against the German flag – it’s an honour and privilege.”

The British driver also joined the chorus of approval for England’s Ashley Young, with whom he grew up in Stevenage. “I remember him being an awesome player as a kid,” he said. “To see his success and the ups and downs he’s had, his dream was always to play for England, he envisioned it and he is doing it.”

Hamilton’s challenge in France may be tougher than expected with his Mercedes team set to reveal on Friday whether he will use a new engine at the race or a new engine that is upgraded. The upgraded version was rejected as not ready before Canada and if he takes the new unit but of the older specification it could be up to a tenth a lap slower than the upgraded engine Ferrari have employed.