Wada may cut permitted limit of medication at centre of Froome case

The World Anti-Doping Agency is considering whether to slash the daily permissible limit of salbutamol, the asthma medication at the centre of the Chris Froome case, the Guardian can reveal. Wada’s director general, Olivier Niggli, also raised the possibility of Wada lowering the dosage for which a TUE for salbutamol would be required.

The UCI’s decision last week to clear Froome, who had tested for double the permitted amount of salbutamol at the Vuelta a España in September, has led to stinging criticisms of Wada’s science, which continued even after it released a more detailed statement explaining its decision not to appeal the UCI ruling on Wednesday.

There have also been suggestions the salbutamol test itself is fatally flawed – including from Prof Ken Fitch, the sports scientist responsible for the regulations – because of the risk of false positives.

Niggli rejected both accusations. “Maybe the finger is being pointed in the wrong direction – and maybe what needs to be done is to point the finger at how much we allow athletes to take and maybe be more restrictive. Maybe the weakness in the system is that we are being too nice,” he added. “Maybe we need to be tougher and say: ‘You are going to have to take less, otherwise you need a TUE.’”

Under current rules athletes are allowed a maximum of 1600 micograms of salbutamol over 24 hours, with no more than 800mg taken in a 12-hour period. But Wada’s director of science, Dr Olivier Rabin, suggested those limits could potentially be cut by between a quarter and a half.

“It is certainly a question we need to raise,” he said. “Some asthma experts say we should reduce it to 500 or 600 [per 12 hours]. I think it is important to allow some dosage which are used by the vast majority of athletes – maybe 200 to 400 per day – but the point we are debating is very legitimate.”

Niggli also insisted that the fact Froome was not sanctioned was not unusual for salbutamol cases and that 20%!o(MISSING)f such cases have a similar result. “These cases are not black and white, which means they require a process,” he said. “I know a lot of people would love it if it was positive or negative, but it is not the case. So until we have a different test, or the science evolves, we will have to deal with it.”

He defended Wada’s decision not to force Froome to undergo a pharmacokinetic study (CPKT), which would have attempted to replicate the conditions that led to the Team Sky rider exceeding the salbutamol limits .

“The normal course of action is indeed this CPKT excretion study,” Niggli said. “However, clearly the spirit of the rule is if you can explain why you have been above the limit then it is not a doping case. And in this particular case there was a procedural agreement made by the UCI with the athlete to give him an opportunity to provide his explanation in the early stage.”

Niggli admitted that until last month Wada had nonetheless expected Froome to undergo the test. “However in June we received a lot of explanation and a lot of different studies from the athlete,” he said. “And there were two factors. One was that reproducing the same conditions from this athlete in this particular case was almost impossible, in particular because he had an illness.

“The second part is that we got explanations which experts came to the conclusion were not inconsistent with having taken a therapeutic dose.”

When it was put to Wada that they only had Froome’s word for his salbutamol intake, Rabin accepted that he could not be “absolutely sure of the dose that has been taken”. He said: “That is not possible with the level of variability with salbutamol, for a simple reason – with inhaled salbutamol, part of it is going into your gut intestinal tract, very similar to an oral intake. So there is quite a bit of variability even for anyone inhaling.”

In a press release on Wednesday, Wada revealed it had requested to intervene in the UCI proceedings as a third party in April so as to meet any challenge to the salbutamol regime, but its request was denied by a UCI tribunal.

When asked whether the UCI had made the right decision, Niggli replied: “We offered to support with the scientific elements we had related to the test, but it was a matter for the federation in charge. The fact they didn’t accept that in this case was just showing that we were not in control of the process.”

Wada insist the potential changes were in the spirit of constantly reviewing its rules to be in line with the latest available science, not as a reaction to Froome’s case.