Red Bull hope Honda’s promise will persuade Daniel Ricciardo to stay

T he Red Bull team owner, Dietrich Mateschitz, must have felt somewhat aggrieved that the timing when he finally secured a race in Austria – under whose flag his team race – proved to be, well, just out. With four drivers’ and constructors’ championships between 2010 and 2013, when Mateschitz brought Formula One back to what had inevitably been rechristened the Red Bull Ring in 2014, a glorious homecoming might have been expected.

What transpired fell far short and his team have almost been in transition ever since. As they return to Spielberg a new chapter is beginning for Red Bull, one Mateschitz must believe will ultimately return the home win he has been waiting for.

In 2014, when the new turbo-hybird era began, no one had foreseen such dominance from Mercedes and at the Red Bull Ring, hosting its first race since 2003, the home team were nowhere. The reigning champion, Sebastian Vettel, did not get into Q3, retired after a series of technical problems on lap 34 and Daniel Ricciardo could manage only eighth.

The season highlighted how far behind Red Bull’s Renault engine was from Mercedes. Vettel, who had come through the ranks of the team, left for Ferrari the next season and by midway through 2015, with the team principal Christian Horner openly criticising Renault, the relationship between team and manufacturer was disintegrating.

Talks for a deal with Mercedes fell through, however, and theoretically engineless, a new deal partly brokered by Bernie Ecclestone made for an uncomfortable rapprochement with Renault. This arrangement has remained but only five wins followed in the next two years, none in Austria, and the Renault power unit is still off the pace of both Mercedes and Ferrari.

Before the last round in France, Red Bull made the bold decision to start afresh with Honda, broadly based around some clear advantages. With Renault now a works team themselves, their engine design would be led around their chassis, which would force Red Bull to potentially compromise their own – not attractive to for a squad that boasts Adrian Newey at the design desk.

Since Red Bull are effectively now the Honda works team they can expect the engine and chassis design to work in concert. Equally, there is the financial gain of no longer being a customer but a manufacturer partner.

The team, which emerged from the ashes of Jaguar in 2005, have not had a works partnership with a manufacturer since then and its potential will have been as attractive to Red Bull as it was to McLaren in 2015. Which, of course, was a well-documented disaster for McLaren, who switched to Renault engines this season but in France their racing director Eric Boullier admitted that he still believed championships could only be won by a works team. Red Bull’s optimism then, albeit with caution, is understandable.

The Honda in the back of the sister team, Toro Rosso, has been a definitive step forward. They delivered the upgrade as planned for Canada and although it suffered one failure there and one in France, it did bring the expected improvement in pace.

The painful years with McLaren, it seems, are beginning to pay off and the manufacturer, who won six titles with Williams and McLaren between 1986 and 1991, has already shifted emphasis to next year’s engine – a good sign in that previously energy had been desperately thrown in to fixing the existing units. “We’re going to be very concentrated on the specifications for next year,” said Honda’s motorsport chief Masashi Yamamoto. “This year’s spec is mainly all decided, so the last half of this year now will be quite focused on the development of the specs for next year.”

They need the drivers to makes something of it, however. The team have already made their belief in Max Verstappen clear, committing to him with a contract until the end of 2020. There is also intent to ensure Ricciardo remains alongside him.

Keeping the Australian seems like the last piece of the jigsaw. He has proved his worth repeatedly and strikingly this season, with wins in China and Monte Carlo. Indeed had he not retired in Bahrain and gone out after an accident with Verstappen in Baku he could be in the thick of the title fight. As it is, he is only 35 points behind Vettel, who is second to Lewis Hamilton.

Ricciardo has been linked with moves to Ferrari, Mercedes, Renault and most recently McLaren. The Honda deal and its engineering rationale was intended to give him notice of Red Bull’s intent and he has said the discussions around his future will ramp up in the next two weeks, beginning in Spielberg.

Horner wants a decision by the summer break, looking for the commitment he requires and short of a seat with Mercedes or Ferrari, it still looks like the Australian’s best bet. Ricciardo was third in Austria in 2017 and although the odds remain against Red Bull finally delivering a win to Mateschitz at the track he owns on Sunday, the chief is likely to view it with greater equanimity as his team look to complete a reboot that will ensure a shot at further titles in the coming years.