Rory McIlroy relives teenage kicks with freewheeling first round at Open

R ory McIlroy got to the 1st tee just before 1pm, as the first few clouds of the day were starting to blow in off the Tay. Like everyone else in the field he came with a head full of ideas, schemes about how to play the course and dreams about how the week was going to work out. McIlroy’s plan, he said on Wednesday, was to freewheel his way round Carnoustie, just like he did when he was a teenager in 2007. “Get up on a tee box and pull a driver out of the bag, not think about the trouble or think about anything, just: ‘This is where I want to hit it.’” He was as good as his word.

In the morning the only man who had hit a driver on the 1st was Tommy Fleetwood. Neither of McIlroy’s playing partners, Marc Leishman and Thorbjorn Olesen, even stopped to consider the idea. But McIlroy wanted to start with a bang and the crowd gave him an extra loud cheer when his caddie pulled the driver out of the bag. McIlroy swished it back and forth, set himself over the ball and thumped it into the far horizon, where it fell and tumbled into a distant fairway bunker. It was a fine reminder of the gamble he was taking.

McIlroy figures the rewards are worth the risk. And he managed to dig the ball out, up over a swale and another greenside bunker, and get it down pin high. He made a fine lag putt and finished the hole with a tap-in. It was par the hard way, the first of many. McIlroy kept getting himself into trouble with his first shot and out of it again with his second. His driving was wayward, his putting erratic but at the end of it all he had scrambled around in 69, two under par, three shots off the clubhouse lead. Lord knows what he will shoot if he actually plays well for 18 holes.

“I think when I played on Monday, I definitely thought it was going to be beneficial to be as aggressive as I possibly could be,” McIlroy said afterwards. “It’s very playable from off the fairway. As long as you don’t hit it in the fairway bunkers, you’re always going to have a shot at the green. That’s why I tried to stay as aggressive as I possibly could even though I wasn’t hitting the driver maybe as well as I could.” That was an understatement. McIlroy hardly found a fairway all day. “Yeah,” he said with a rueful grin. “I didn’t see the fairway much.”

Still, McIlroy figures that, if you play aggressive round here, you might make more bogeys than playing it safe but you are going to make more birdies as well – and he was right about that. He made three birdies and only one bogey, on the par-four 5th, after his approach spun away off the right side of the green. He curled a long, loopy putt round the slope but then missed his second from five feet or so. It was the first of four putts he missed from that range. Of course, the other three were all for birdie. If he had just had his touch, he would have been leading the field.

The first of the birdies was on the 3rd, where he drove over the back of the green. His ball flew right over the heads of Leishman and Olesen, who both chose to lay-up. Then McIlroy bumped the ball on and made a nine-foot putt. After that he had a long stretch of scrambling golf. He was right off the tee on the 6th, where his birdie putt rolled round the cup and out again from five feet, and right again at the 7th, where he missed another short birdie putt. Then he started to pull his drives and fetched up in the gallery on the left-hand side at both the 9th and 10th.

“You know, it wasn’t pretty off the tee but I got it done,” McIlroy said. He made his way through the back nine without dropping a shot, thanks to some superb recovery work from out of the thin and wispy rough. Leishman, meanwhile, was having a real roller coaster of a round. He was four under, tied for second, coming up to the 9th, after four birdies in six holes. In the Open, though, everything can change quick as a snap of the fingers. He took three putts on the 9th, hit his second shot on the 10th into the burn and, after a drop, his fourth shot skittered over the back of the green. So Leishman dropped three shots in two holes. Another three bogeys on the back nine left him one-over on 72.

Leishman and McIlroy were moving in opposite directions on the leaderboard as they came through the back nine, where McIlroy finally started earning some of those rewards he was chasing. There was another missed putt at the 11th but he finally made one on the 12th and then another on the 14th, where he had an eagle putt from 25 feet. He followed that with a brilliant par save from 25 feet at the 16th. He almost finished the round with another birdie but his putt on the 18th just slid by on the right. He was feeling fine as he came off the green, ready to double down on Friday. “I’ll adopt the same strategy but hopefully hit a few more fairways.”