Australia end Ireland’s unbeaten run as David Pocock returns in style

From Surfers Paradise to total wipeout. Ireland’s 12-match winning run hit the rocks against a fired up Australia as David Pocock’s late try sank the Six Nations champions in Brisbane. Bernard Foley chipped in with 13 points but it was fitting that the back-rower, in his first international appearance since 2016, had the final say – his sabbatical has clearly had the desired effect.

Ireland arrived as the pride of the north – Michael Cheika, the Australia coach, made sure to proclaim them favourites – but they had not beaten Australia away for 39 years and here was a reminder that while club rugby down under is flatlining, the Wallabies always have it in them to flourish.

It would be easy to blame Ireland’s defeat on Joe Schmidt’s decision to relegate Johnny Sexton to the bench. Joey Carbery did miss a straightforward kick at goal in the second half but it must also be said that Sexton’s error – missing touch after Israel Folau’s try had been overturned – was one of the turning points in this match.

Ireland did not lose because of the identity of their fly-half, rather they ran into a ferocious Wallabies side who do not lose in Brisbane often and who boasted the game’s two outstanding performers in Folau and Pocock. The former was flawless in the air and frightening with ball in hand, the latter lethal on the floor.

The sides now head to Melbourne next Saturday – Ireland no doubt with Sexton in their starting lineup, the Wallabies with a spring in their step. Cheika knew what he was doing when heralding this Ireland side as the best in their history but he will be mightily relieved that a whitewashing, as befell the Wallabies two years ago when England arrived as grand slam Six Nations champions, is no longer possible.

In 2016 England found themselves two tries down inside 15 minutes, so it was to Ireland’s credit that they kept their line intact in the breathless opening exchanges. Australia flew out of the blocks but had only an opening Foley penalty to show for it.

Carbery, composed if not in total control of proceedings, replied with two penalties but Australia took an 8-6 lead into half-time thanks to Foley’s try. Robbie Henshaw had already ridden his luck when flying out of the line but when he attempted a man-and-ball hit on Foley he was too late and while Samu Kerevi was stopped short, Will Genia found his fly-half on the short side and Australia were ahead again.

After the break it was Australia’s turn to defend en masse. CJ Stander broke clear but Australia did superbly well to scramble, Pocock playing an integral role in denying the British & Irish Lion.

Ireland began stringing together their phases – they reached 19 before Pocock made the crucial turnover – but mistakes were creeping in for the Wallabies. Michael Hooper was foolishly offside – to his relief Carbery missed the target – but the Munster-bound fly-half made no mistake when Pocock was harshly pinged soon afterwards.

Then came Folau’s disallowed try, a shame simply because of the ruthless precision with which it was taken. Will Genia, Kurtley Beale and Foley combined to set the full-back clear down the right but the referee, Marius van der Westhuizen, ruled it out on the advice of his TMO for an infringement from Adam Coleman before Australia were even in possession. Ultimately it proved academic but Ireland may have delivered a killer blow had Sexton found the corner with the subsequent kick.

Not least because of Sexton’s presence, Ireland’s bench looked by far the stronger but despite calling on the Lions duo Jack McGrath and Tadhg Furlong, Australia won a scrum penalty in front of the posts and retook the lead at 11-9. Pocock powered over from close-range soon after – Australia scenting the opportunity to put the game to bed – before Ireland had the ignominy of a disallowed try for Kieran Marmion at the death.