Russians' last-minute Winter Olympics appeal rejected

The British team in Pyeongchang has welcomed the decision to reject the appeals of 47 Russian athletes and coaches for last-minute entry into the Winter Olympics.

The Russians had argued that they had been wrongly excluded from Pyeongchang by an International Olympic Committee eligibility panel, which was set up to determine which Russians were considered “clean” after widespread state-sponsored doping at the Sochi Winter Olympics was uncovered.

But the Court of Arbitration for Sport turned down their appeals and Sir Hugh Robertson, the chair of the British Olympic Association, admitted it was a relief for the athletes competing for Team GB.

“It’s clearly disappointing that we are still talking about this on the eve of a Winter Olympics,” he said. “But the decision is reassuring. We want our athletes to be competing against the very best but in the knowledge they are facing clean athletes.”

Cas ruled the IOC panel’s decisions were fair and not carried out “in a discriminatory, arbitrary or unfair manner”. The arbitrators said the IOC’s decision to create an invitation list of Russian athletes to compete as Olympic Athletes from Russia could not be described as a sanction but rather as an eligibility decision.

“We welcome this decision which supports the fight against doping and brings clarity for all athletes,” an IOC spokesperson said.

It means 168 Russians will compete at these Games, the third largest delegation after the USA and Canada, albeit under the Olympic Athlete of Russia banner. There will be no place, however, for Victor Ahn, the most decorated speedskater in winter Olympic history, who switched from South Korea to Russia before the Sochi Games.

Russia’s deputy prime minister, Vitaly Mutko, was scathing in his assessment telling TASS the Cas decision would “diminish competition and attention to the Games”.

Meanwhile, the chair of UK Sport, Katherine Grainger, urged British team memebers who were competing against Russian athletes to focus on their performances and not their opponents. “I concur with Hugh’s comments and it has been a difficult time for everyone,” she said. “From an athlete perspective, you don’t want any distractions now, so all our messages to all are to focus on their performance – that’s the most important thing – and to move forward from here.”

Grainger also insisted that the loss of snowboarder Katie Omerod, who was considered a medal prospect in slopestyle and Big Air, would not derail Team GB’s plans for its greatest ever Winter Olympics.

“First and foremost it is incredibly sad for the whole team that Katie will miss out,” she said. “She was definitely one of our medal hopes but we have a strong team in many of the sports and we are still hoping for many great performances.”

Omerod under went an operation in the early hours of Friday morning on a broken heel, having earlier fractured her wrist.

“Her health is the priority,” added Grainger. “But the great thing is she has always come back stronger from injuries. And she is at a young enough age that she still has a long enough career ahead of her.”

Robertson said that Omerod’s injuries were a freak accident, and that the snowboarding and ski areas in Pyeongchang were excellent. “The message coming back from our athletes about the facilities is that they are second to none,” he added.