Angelique Kerber ready to be on top of the world again after Wimbledon win

T he path to glory is rarely smooth. Angelique Kerber’s victory against Serena Williams on Saturday gave her a third grand slam title, two years after an eight‑month period in which she won the Australian Open and US Open and became the world No 1. As the enormity of being a Wimbledon champion began to sink in, the German said it was the experience of 2017, when she lost her way and fell out of the top 20, that laid the bedrock of her return to the top.

“The last two years gives me so much experience, good and bad things,” said Kerber, who allowed herself a brief sip of champagne a couple of hours after her 6-3, 6-3 win against Williams, whose own achievement in reaching the final, 10 months after a traumatic childbirth, was truly remarkable.

“Without 2017, especially, I would not be here. Because I learnt so much from myself, like a person, improving my tennis, improving me as a tennis player, and I think that is just the process. The process of years of playing tournaments, playing important matches, being in the situation where the pressure is maybe on your side, or on the side of the opponent. It is just a process you have to go through.”

Perhaps it is her Polish heritage – her grandparents live in Puszczykowo and she owns a place there – that gives Kerber that feeling, that to fully enjoy the highs you must first experience the lows. She is very close to her grandparents, who watched the final from home on Saturday, enormously proud of their granddaughter. “I spoke with my grandparents after the match, straight after, because I knew that they support me at home in front of the TV,” Kerber said. “They are really proud and without them I wouldn’t be here, with all my family, they support me my whole life and I think they will drink tonight as well a little bit.”

Kerber will climb to No 4 in the rankings when the list is updated on Monday and having struggled in the second half of 2017, she has a good chance to go higher, perhaps even to regain the No 1 ranking she previously held going into last year’s Wimbledon. Last time, she found it hard to cope with all the things that go with being the world’s top-ranked player; this time, she feels she will be better equipped.

“I was enjoying [being No 1] but I was not expecting so many things because when you reach the top, you have no idea what you have to deal with in this moment,” she said. “What I have learned from that is that sometimes you have to say no, and take time for yourself, not doing every single day media or some stuff, just making a few days for yourself. When you do this, I think you can enjoy it more. [If it happens again] I will deal with this situation a little bit differently.”

Her coach, Wim Fissette, deserves a lot of the credit, having begun working with Kerber at the end of 2017, after a successful but short spell with Britain’s Johanna Konta. The Belgian, who has also coached Kim Clijsters, Simona Halep and Victoria Azarenka, helped Kerber technically and mentally, rebuilding her confidence and adding a new offensive dimension to her already brilliant defensive skills.

With three grand slam titles, Kerber is now fourth among active players, behind Serena Williams, Venus Williams and Maria Sharapova. The 30-year-old needs the French Open to complete the full set, and although clay is her weakest surface, she is a phenomenal athlete with time on her side. Fissette has no doubt there are more titles to come.

“I am still sure that we haven’t seen the best Angie,” he told a small group of reporters. “Even physically she can do a lot better. Her serve can still improve and her offensive game, the more she feels success with her offensive game, the more she will use that as well. Also, with the experience she has, she is taking more experience into those matches to stay mentally calm.”

It will take time, no doubt, for Kerber to appreciate her achievement. But when she thinks about everything she has gone through to reach this point, she will enjoy it. Then, she can kick on and go again.

“I am sitting here and I am the champion but it’s still not really in my mind [that it is real],” she said. “I think that I have to sleep a few nights and see my trophy and then maybe I can realise that I won this moment. When I won the match point … there have been a lot of emotions, a lot of work that I put in these last few months, a lot of sweating in the practice sessions to play in these moments.”