Sports quiz of the week: Joshua v Parker, World Cup winners and a mascot

p

p

Who won at home? Who is a proud dad? And who fears for his place?

Anthony Joshua returns to the ring this weekend. But where?

Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty Images

Eight countries have won the World Cup. Which three of them lost to other World Cup-winning nations in the international break?

Netherlands, France and Italy

England, Uruguay and Germany

Germany, Italy and Argentina Germany lost to Brazil; Italy lost to Argentina; and Argentina lost to Spain.

Portugal, France and Argentina

One is from Watford. The other is from Auckland. Where do they meet on Saturday?

London

Las Vegas

Cardiff Two world heavyweight champions, Anthony Joshua and Joseph Parker, will face off at the Principality Stadium at around 10:30pm local time.

New York

Joshua has won all 20 of his professional fights by knockout. How many of Parker’s 24 fights has he won by knockout?

24

18 Parker is unbeaten but he has been taken the distance on six occasions – including his three most recent fights.

12

6

What is Inverness Caledonian Thistle’s new mascot called?

Caley Ballistic

Patrick Thistle

Ernest Inverness

Lionel Nessi The club’s chairman explained: “Nessie lives right on our doorstep and draws thousands of tourists from throughout the world to our area every year. For the football context, Lionel Messi is one of the best players ever to have played the game. Messi rhymes with Nessie – and so we have the splendid combination of Lionel Nessi.”

England have played eight games in the last eight months and have lost none of them. Who are the only team to have scored against Gareth Southgate’s side from open play?

Italy

Netherlands

Brazil

Germany

Lithuania

Slovenia

Slovakia England have only conceded two goals in eight matches – one in a 2-1 win against Slovakia and one from a dubious penalty against Italy this week. The World Cup is in the bag.

Malta

Which country picked up their first ever victory at home this week thanks to a deflected free-kick from a Notts County player?

Gibraltar Liam Walker scored in the 88th minute to give Gibraltar a 1-0 win against Latvia. Walker is now the joint top scorer in his country’s history.

Andorra

San Marino

Cayman Islands

Which striker – who scored 40 goals for his country – watched his 18-year-old son make his international debut this week?

Raúl

Christian Vieri

Romário

Patrick Kluivert Justin Kluivert, who plays his club football for Ajax, came on as a substitute for the Netherlands in their 3-0 win over Portugal. Patrick said he was “so proud”.

What unlikely feat did Brechin City achieve this week?

They won the Scottish Championship with 10 games to spare

They played two goalkeepers as centre-backs and still won

They had five men sent off in 14 minutes

They were relegated without winning a game all season Brechin’s stats make for tough reading: played 29, lost 25, drawn four, won none.

Who was Borussia Dortmund striker Michy Batshuayi talking about when he said: “He’s a champion. He pushes himself beyond his limits every day. He wants to beat all the records. I’m happy for him, but I hope he doesn’t come and take my place”?

Eden Hazard

Olivier Giroud

Robert Lewandowski

Usain Bolt Bolt was given a trial by Dortmund this week during the international break.

Why was a baseball game between the LA Dodgers and LA Angels stopped early this week?

Zlatan Ibrahimovic was arriving in the city and the players wanted to meet him

The Dodgers players said they were 'bored' of the Angels' tactics

A pipe broke at the Dodger Stadium and the field was flooded with sewage Dodgers outfielder Andrew Toles said: "I thought it was Gatorade coming from the stands. I smelled it. It was nasty, man."

Three cats invaded the field and the stewards couldn't catch them so the players walked off

You got…

Challenge your friends