Sports quiz of the week: All Blacks v Lions, family photos and farming

p

p

Who won in New Zealand? Who struck an unlikely pose? And who was fuming?

• Have a go at our previous sports quizzes

The Lions line up before their match against the Maori All Blacks.

Photograph: Hannah Peters/Getty Images

Peter O'Mahony will captain the Lions against the All Blacks on Saturday. Which of his countrymen led the team out for the first Test when the Lions last toured New Zealand, in 2005?

Paul O'Connell

Brian O'Driscoll O’Driscoll lasted just 41 seconds of the first Test after he was spear tackled by Keven Mealamu and Tana Umaga. He dislocated his right shoulder and had to watch as his team-mates lost the series 3-0.

Ronan O'Gara

Gordon D'Arcy

The All Blacks have only lost one of their last 22 Test matches. Who beat them?

England

France

Australia

Ireland Although All Blacks had their revenge a fortnight later, when they went to Dublin and beat Ireland 21-9.

When did the All Blacks last lose a Test match in New Zealand?

1998

2003

2009 South Africa beat them 32-29 in Hamilton.

2013

In each the last seven golf majors ...?

... the world No1 has finished outside the top 10

... Rory McIlroy has failed to make the cut

... the winner has been American

... the winner has picked up the first major of his career Brooks Koepka, Sergio García, Jimmy Walker, Henrik Stenson, Dustin Johnson, Danny Willett and Jason Day.

What did Margate striker Mike Thalassitis do this week to leave his manager "fuming"?

He won the town's annual ice-cream eating contest

He was spotted stealing a free ride at the local Dreamland Amusement Park

He was pictured in the local paper wearing a Maidstone United shirt

He went on ITV show Love Island without telling the club "It's not an ideal situation," said Margate manager Steve Watt with a degree of magnanimity. "I'd have appreciated a call to say he would be going on the show and potentially missing preseason. It's laughable. He's a young, good-looking lad and he's going to go in and have a bit of fun I'd imagine. As along as it doesn't affect anything down in Margate, then I won't have a problem with it."

The 2017 Women’s Cricket World Cup begins this weekend, with England v India and New Zealand v Sri Lanka kicking things off on Saturday. Which team has won six of the previous 11 tournaments?

England

Australia And they are favourites to win it again this year.

New Zealand

India

Seventeen-year-old Moise Kean needs his father's permission to sign a new contract at Juventus. Why might he scupper the deal?

He won't sign until his son is given the No9 squad number, which belongs to Gonzalo Higuaín

He says Juventus have reneged on a promise they made to buy him tractors Kean's father said: "Juventus offered a contract of €700,000-a-year, which was fine, but the problem is they had also promised me some tractors for my agricultural business in the Ivory Coast, but now they say there is no budget for them. I've got several hectares of land I would like to cultivate with rice and corn. I asked for this agricultural machinery and they told me there wouldn't be any problems, but now things have changed."

He doesn't want his son playing for a club that "embarrassed his whole family" in the Champions League final

He says his son should not be associated with the club after the Calciopoli scandal

Who hit a century in the Champions Trophy final?

Fakhar Zaman Zaman scored 114 in the final. Joe Root's 133 against Bangladesh was the biggest knock of the tournament.

Hardik Pandya

Joe Root

Rohit Sharma

Oscar has been banned for eight matches and fined £4,620 for starting a brawl in a Chinese Super League game. How long does it take him to earn £4,620?

116 minutes Shanghai SIPG pay him £20,800,000 a year so he's good for it.

Six hours

18 hours

Three days

Where was Peter Crouch when he tweeted a picture with the caption: "Summer for me is about time with family"?

Standing beside his wife

Holding his kids

Feeding two giraffes What a guy.

Towering over Mount Rushmore

You got…

Challenge your friends