Katie Swan sinks to heavy Wimbledon defeat by Mihaela Buzarnescu

There are ways to transform even the most demoralising of experiences into a positive, which was something for Katie Swan to keep in mind after her Wimbledon adventure ground to a halt against Mihaela Buzărnescu, the Romanian whose stop-start career serves as a reminder that nothing can be taken for granted in this unforgiving game.

These are the moments when Swan must remember that shattering losses can be as formative as striking wins, painful though it was for the rising star of British tennis to suffer so much in front of an expectant crowd on No3 Court. Two days after the 19-year-old demonstrated her vast potential with a destruction of Irina-Camelia Begu, a bitter dose of reality arrived in the form of a 6-0, 6-3 defeat by the 29th seed in the second round. Even a supportive text from Andy Murray could not calm Swan’s nerves once she stepped on court.

Yet there is no need to dramatise setbacks at this stage of her development and it was encouraging that she could look on the bright side after tumbling out of her home tournament.

The world No 204 said she was happy with her progress this week, hopeful about her chances in US Open qualifying next month and determined to crack the top 100 soon, while she delivered a nice line after being asked if she had any advice for Katie Boulter, who plays Naomi Osakaon Thursday. “It would help if you don’t lose the first set 6-0,” Swan told her friend.

Boulter, who will have her work cut out against the 18th seed, was sitting to Swan’s right. The British pair both laughed, even though they had just been beaten in the doubles by Lucie Hradecka and Hsieh Su-wei. They are maintaining a sense of perspective. Tennis, after all, has a way of building up its contenders before cutting them down.

Buzărnescu, who plays the No 7 seed Karolina Pliskova next, was a talented junior way back when, only for a persistent knee injury to derail her progress. For a while the 30-year-old feared she would never pick up a racket again, forcing her to pursue other interests. She found meaning studying for a doctorate in sports science in Bucharest and received her PhD in 2016.

It is likely that Dr Buzărnescu, a crafty left-hander who counts Pete Sampras and Monica Seles as her idols, realises there is more to life than tennis. Yet her passion for the sport remained intact, convincing her to give it another try when her aching knee improved. Starting 2017 outside the top 500 was simply another obstacle to overcome.

It has been a remarkable comeback. Buzărnescu had never appeared in a grand slam event before qualifying for last year’s US Open, where she lost her first match, but she arrived at SW19 after reaching the fourth round of last month’s French Open and looks keen to show why she has rocketed to 28th in the world.

This is a woman making up for lost time and she was certainly in a hurry during the first set. Swan had seen off another Romanian in the first round, making light of Begu’s status as the world No 36, but she found Buzărnescu a tougher puzzle to solve.

Her inexperience told in the midday sun, 27 unforced errors and five double-faults undermining her effort. Swan, who is part of Murray’s management group, was shooting anxious looks at her box early on and Buzărnescu absorbed the youngster’s hard serves and dangerous groundstrokes before closing out the first set with a drop shot.

“I just need to gain experience competing at this level,” Swan said. “The more I do, the more I’ll get used to it and become more consistent being able to play at that speed.”

The good news is that Swan was capable of laughing at herself, endearing herself to the crowd with an ironic celebration when she broke in the first game of the second set, but Buzărnescu sealed it with a backhand winner after 74 minutes.

It was a tough way for Swan to fall to earth but she should remember that Buzărnescu has bounced back from worse.