Why Cleveland will be just fine without LeBron James

O n Tuesday morning, workers in Cleveland began pulling down the gigantic LeBron James photograph that had sprawled across 10 stories of a building downtown. The messianic mural, with James’s arms thrown wide in the pose of Cleveland’s savior, had become – for many Americans – the image that came to mind when they thought of the city, if they thought about it at all. With James leaving the Cleveland Cavaliers for the Los Angeles Lakers, the banner’s removal seemed to signify the end of an era.

But before the picture could be fully dismantled, thunder rumbled and lightning cut a zig-zag pattern in the sky. Rain poured down. The workers scampered to safety. And for a time on Tuesday, Cleveland was left with a half-complete James. Suddenly this became a new symbol for Cleveland: a place that can’t let go of the hometown hero who made a winner out of a city known for losing.

They’ve suspended work on taking the LeBron banner down because of heavy rain and a thunder and lightning storm. It is expected to be finished by tomorrow, per a source. pic.twitter.com/7ixN3NlM9b

July 3, 2018

The problem with iconic photographs is they never tell the full story. They get twisted into whatever we want them to become. Tuesday wasn’t the first time the banner of James had come down. The photo had rested there before, during James’s first run with the Cavs, only to be yanked down when he abandoned Cleveland for the Miami Heat in 2010. And while the picture might have appeared to the world as an organic celebration of James’s gift to his homeland, it was actually a 100-foot-tall advertisement for Nike, the manufacturer of his lucrative shoe line – a perpetual sales pitch for a very rich basketball player by a very rich sneaker company.

One man cannot save a city, not even one who stands 6ft 8in and dunks so hard that the backboard shivers like an earthquake in his wake. The idea that James came home in 2014 to release Cleveland from decades of despair is a wonderful story, one that satisfied many sportswriters, present company included. It was catnip for Nike’s marketers. And it served James well as he grew from a young, naive and entitled superstar into a powerful voice on racism and oppression.

The truth is that Cleveland existed for more than 200 years before James returned from Miami and it will exist long after the details of his departure to Los Angeles are forgotten. He played some great basketball. He won a championship in 2016. The city’s five-decade-long sports drought was washed away. There was a parade. People were happy. Then life in Cleveland went on.

If a city is every truly saved then Cleveland was saved well before the Cavs came back from Oakland two summers ago, lugging the championship trophy. All those old tales about the crumbling metropolis on the banks of Lake Erie were washed away in a renewal that had nothing to do with basketball or James. It’s been decades since the Cuyahoga River burned. The city’s bankruptcy happened six years before James was born. The finances recovered before he ever dribbled a ball. Cleveland has won its historic battles because of Cleveland not because James played some basketball games at the Quicken Loans Arena.

James understands this better than most. He sat in a makeshift press conference room beneath the arena’s stands on the night the Cavs lost this year’s finals and talked about the championship he had vowed to bring Cleveland when he came back in 2014. “Unfinished business,” he called it. With that business now concluded he hinted that he had been absolved of great responsibility. He wasn’t filling potholes or cutting classroom crowding. There was nothing more he could do for the town.

He is just a basketball player. A very good basketball player, but a basketball player nonetheless. As Ken Gordon, a longtime Cleveland sports fan told me in 2015, when the Cavs lost the first of their four finals series with Golden State: “Winning a championship isn’t what defines my life anymore.” Gordon was 63 at the time. His implication was that James and the Cavs had brought joy, but his days were filled with more important things than sports.

Cleveland without James will be just fine. The Cavs won’t be able to replace what he brought every night. But they have to believe in the potential of top draft pick Collin Sexton and the franchise’s ability to regenerate itself around players like Kevin Love, Tristan Thompson and JR Smith. The city’s baseball team leads the American League Central by 11.5 games. The Browns have a new quarterback and new hope, even if new Browns quarterbacks usually bring more heartache than hope. Stores and restaurants are opening. Conventions come to town. The city hums with life that has nothing to do with whether the world’s best basketball player is wearing the Cavs uniform.

Maybe it is best that James’s picture has come down. Something about that banner always seemed contrived, a message that Cleveland needed a basketball player to believe it was something important. In the end, that story was wrong.

James needed to come home and win a title for Cleveland more than Cleveland needed James to come back and win a title for the city. Now life can go on. James can head off to the Lakers and Cleveland can go back to being Cleveland once more.