Jenson Button and Fernando Alonso revitalised by 24 Hours challenge

Having long occupied a special place in motor racing, this year’s 86th edition of the Le Mans 24 Hours has an added sense of excitement with the participation of two former Formula One world champions in Fernando Alonso and Jenson Button. They will take to the track on Saturday in the highest LMP1 category, with Alonso racing for Toyota and Button for the privateer SMP team.

For Alonso, it is a step towards his goal of matching Graham Hill in winning motor racing’s triple crown, for which he needs to add Le Mans and the Indy 500 to his Monaco wins. At the Circuit de la Sarthe, the Spaniard was relaxed, yet with an appreciable sense of focus and an enthusiasm that has increasingly been missing driving an uncompetitive McLaren in F1.

Being here was special, he insisted. “The fans feel the magic of the place,” he said. “Where you have the contact with the fans, like the drivers’ parade, you feel the amazing atmosphere Le Mans has. The parade lap will be very special and I will try to enjoy every moment and have the memories for a long time.”

Alonso has been diligent in his preparation and won the opening round of the WEC in Spa, but energised by the remarkable challenge of the event. “This race is 16 F1 grands prix in 24 hours.” he said. “When I drive [my stints] it is like doing two grands prix. In F1, you have two weeks to recover, here you have four hours. There is no race tougher than this one for the car, the mechanics, the engine and the drivers.”

Button shared Alonso’s toil while at McLaren but for the Briton this race has been part of his love of all forms of motorsport since he was eight years old when Jaguar’s win at Le Mans in 1988 caught his eye. F1 was always his goal but while his enthusiasm for it had diminished by the end his genuine passion for racing remained. Le Mans has revealed a reinvigorated driver.

He has admitted that by his final season in F1, in 2016, he was no longer enjoying racing. The driver in him has now been hewn afresh. “It’s definitely a new chapter in my life,” he said.

“Motorsport is all about improving yourself. I am 38 and my reactions are just as good as when I was 20. If you still have the passion and love for the sport you can be as competitive as when you were 20. That started disappearing in 2016 but it’s back. I would say I have not been in better shape and more excited about racing.”

He is a world away from the driver who walked away from F1 and there is a very human element to making it through the 24 that clearly appeals to him. “That team atmosphere of achieving something together is emotional because they have been through so much together. Really pushing the boundaries of machine and human and that’s what we all love – that human emotion from such a long race in a team sport.”

Alonso’s car, also crewed by Kazuki Nakajima and Sébastien Buemi, will start from pole in front of the sister Toyota and the Japanese marque are in the strongest possible position to take victory. They are the only manufacturer in LMP1 and, as well as a speed advantage, can go longer without stopping and enjoy shorter pit stops than their competitors.

However, no one is taking anything for granted. Toyota have been the class of the field three times in recent years. Yet in 2014 and 2017 minor problems cost them the race and, devastatingly, in 2016 a fractured air line caused their leading car to grind to a halt with one lap to go.

The team’s preparations have been extensive including running their cars on three wheels to simulate damage and they have never been better placed to become only the second Japanese manufacturer to win the race, alongside Mazda.

For Button and Alonso, there is a personal and palpable, pleasure in the challenge of this greatest of races but for the Spaniard in particular there is a point to be made as well. “If you can succeed in different cars, and scenarios, you will be the most complete driver,” he said. “A very attractive target.”