Jess Varnish to sue UK Sport and British Cycling over bullying claims

Cycling’s governing body accused of being two-faced in dealings with rider Case centres on sex discrimination, victimisation and unfair dismissal claims

Jess Varnish was controversially dropped from the elite funding programme last year.

Photograph: Alex Livesey/Getty Images

Jess Varnish’s team have accused British Cycling of saying different things to them in private when it comes to her case than it has in public. The latest criticism of the sport’s governing body came as it was revealed that Varnish is suing UK Sport and British Cycling for sex discrimination, detriment suffered from whistleblowing, victimisation and unfair dismissal.

The 26-year-old track sprinter, who claimed the former technical director Shane Sutton had told her to “move on and get on with having a baby” after she was controversially dropped from the elite funding programme last year, will have her case heard at a preliminary employment tribunal in April.

Yet Varnish’s team remain frustrated that her efforts to resolve her complaints, which have dragged on for more than 18 months, have hit a brick wall. And a source close to Varnish said: “What British Cycling is saying in public is very different to what they are saying in private.

“All Jess is trying to achieve is to ensure athletes have rights and are treated fairly. She’s frustrated that neither UK Sport nor British Cycling have changed the grey situation that athletes still remain in. They have no grievances procedures. They have no whistleblower policies. They have no pension rights. The reason why she is doing this is she genuinely wants to effect change.”

However a British Cycling spokesman insisted the organisation was doing its utmost to reach a resolution. He said: “We are in an ongoing and positive dialogue with Jess and look forward to reaching a resolution which all parties will regard as equitable.”

The latest dispute came as it was revealed UK Sport had applied for a strike-out order to have Varnish’s case dismissed, along with a costs order and deposit order, which would have led to Varnish’s assets being seized. However on Monday a judge dismissed the applications, determining they were overly aggressive, allowing Varnish to proceed towards an employment tribunal which will determine whether she was an employee of British Cycling and UK Sport and thus more widely protected under the law.

Sutton, who resigned, was found to have used sexist language towards Varnish in a British Cycling investigation but was cleared of eight of nine allegations, including the key complaint regarding the remark about having a baby.

In March a draft independent review into Varnish’s dismissal, led by the British rowing chair and BOA board member, Annamarie Phelps, found an internal British Cycling investigation into allegations of sexism had been “sanitised”. It also suggested Varnish lost her funding “as an act of retaliation” for criticising coaching staff at last year’s track world championships in London and was “removed” from the programme without due warning. This form did not feature in the final version, which was published in June, although Phelps herself said she would not rule out this as a reason for Varnish’s contract not being renewed.

UK Sport says it will not publicly comment on the case as the legal issues are continuing.