World Cup finals, The Open at Carnoustie and middle-distance melees

1) It’s France v Croatia in Sunday’s World Cup final, so let’s take a look back at previous editions – starting with the most disappointing final of all. Brazil v Italy, at the Pasadena Rose Bowl in 1994. Maybe fast forward to the end. Italia 90’s showcase wasn’t much better. Much, much better came four years earlier in the Azteca Stadium; Diego Maradona’s pass for Jorge Burruchaga’s Argentina winner is sublime. Perhaps the greatest team performance in a final came in that same stadium in 1970 – Brazil, Pelé, Rivellino, Jairzinho, Gerson, Clodoaldo and, for the coup de grace, Carlos Alberto. The biggest shock came when West Germany beat Hungary in 1954, the “Miracle of Bern”. The most ultra-violent? Try 2006 and Zinedine Zidane’s headbutt.

2) The weekend will also see the men’s and women’s finals at Wimbledon. Difficult not to start our look back anywhere else but Borg v McEnroe in 1980. From the same era, Navratilova v Evert was the great rivalry in the women’s singles. A forgotten men’s final? How about Richard Krajicek vs MaliVai Washington from 1996? And if you have a spare six hours, you can watch the Federer v Nadal epic from 2008 in full. Goran Ivanisevic’s win over Pat Rafter in 2001 was pretty decent, too. One year later, Serena Williams beat Venus for her first singles title at SW19. One from the deep archive here: Maria Bueno, who died last month, wins the 1959 title.

3) The Open starts next week at Carnoustie, and that can only bring back memories of one thing: Jean van de Velde and his nightmare on the 18th hole, trousers pulled up, the Barry Burn, Peter Alliss and all that. Here’s a guide to one of the toughest courses in links golf and some highlights from 2007, when Padraig Harrington won his first Open. In 1975, Tom Watson also won his first Open of five and back in 1968, Gary Player won his second Open of three.

4) The London Stadium will host the new Athletics World Cup this weekend. It sounds a lot like the old Athletics World Cup, which ran from 1977 to 2007. Here’s some footage from 1989, when European champions Team GB reached a sodden Barcelona, with Seb Coe losing out in the 1500m, but Linford Christie winning the 100m. Here’s an overview of the event from 1989. Staying with athletics, Yomif Kejelcha grabs hold of Ethiopian compatriot Selemon Barega’s shorts in the Diamond League, leading to unseemly scuffling. Not quite as brutal as the punch Haile Gebrselassie once took in the 10,000m at the World Junior Championships.

5) The death of Alan Gilzean, the “King of White Hart Lane”, conjured thoughts of Tottenham in the late 60s and early 70s, including being a foil for goalscorer Martin Chivers in the 1972 Uefa Cup final. Here, in 1964, Gilzean scores the goal in a 1-0 win for Scotland over England at Hampden Park. Before joining Spurs, he was star of Dundee’s 1961-62 Scottish title win, including these four goals against Rangers at Ibrox.

6) And finally, if you thought England’s finishing at the World Cup needed some work, check this out.

1) How about a game of competitive tag?

2) The luckiest golf shots ever:

3) Horse racing doyen Brough Scott looks back on his career in sport, broadcasting and journalism with Nick ‘The Tache’ Collins.

Spotter’s badges: LeeWall, whoboughtoranges.

Do subscribe if you fancy.

Do subscribe if you fancy.