Lizzie Deignan: cycling has a long way to go before men and women are equal

C ycling is still a sexist sport, the world champion Lizzie Deignan has said, as she questioned why the Tour de Yorkshire this week offers women a two‑day course while the men race over four days.

The 29-year-old, who won silver at the London Olympics under her maiden name, Armitstead, won the second edition of the fledgling race last year. She will not be contesting her title after announcing she is due to have a baby in September with her husband, the Team Sky rider Philip Deignan.

She will be commentating on the race instead and is frustrated that the female peloton receives so much less support than its male equivalent. Talking to the Guardian on a bike ride from her parents’ home in Otley, which will greet the Tour de Yorkshire on Friday and Sunday, Deignan welcomed the race paying both sexes equally – the overall male winner will receive €6,120 (£5,381), the same as his female counterpart, despite racing double the days. But she suggested prize parity was less important than giving women equal opportunities and, crucially, TV exposure.

“Don’t get me wrong, the fact that we have a huge prize pot is great and it’s great that it’s the same as the men, but I would prefer to get to race for four days,” she said, before dragging the Guardian up Norwood Edge, a climb near Otley. Asked if cycling was still sexist, Deignan said: “Yes. We are still fighting for more races, we are still fighting for more coverage, more budget, more sponsors. We are still a long way behind the men.”

Boels-Dolmans, Deignan’s Dutch squad, has the biggest budget of any women’s cycling team, but it is dwarfed by the coffers of her husband’s team. “We have three full-time members of staff. Sky have 120,” she said. “The men are all paid a minimum wage of €60,000 (£52,773). There are women in our peloton who are paid €200 (£176) a month and they are physios as well as cyclists.”

Deignan had a “mixed” response when announcing her pregnancy. Boels-Dolmans were “a little bit surprised”, she said. She did not tell them she was trying to conceive and hid debilitating morning sickness from them for the first 12 weeks when she couldn’t ride her bike “and couldn’t even look at a vegetable”.

She insists she did not time the baby to coincide with the tail end of the racing season but said her husband had agreed he was not riding the world championships in Austria at the end of September. “It wasn’t even a discussion,” she said.

After obsessing over her weight for the best part of 15 years she says it has been odd seeing her belly grow and put on 5kg in the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. “As a cyclist I used to allow myself to be hungry in the run-up to a meal because I had to be lean and unfortunately that means you do have to have hours of hunger, as long as you are eating well at meals. I never allow myself to be hungry now,” she said.

Only two other riders in the professional peloton are mothers, including Marta Bastianelli, the 2007 world road race champion, who still rides for Alé Cipollini. There is more of a precedent on the track, where Laura Kenny returned this year after maternity leave, and in the world of time trials – the three-times Olympic gold medallist Kristin Armstrong has a son, who watched her win in Rio in 2016. Sarah Storey, 29 times a Paralympic world champion, has two children.

Deignan is on the lookout for a new team, having announced she plans to contest the 2019 world road race championships in Yorkshire, which go right up the road behind her parents’ house. She also has her sights set on the 2020 Tokyo Olympics and thinks she has persuaded British Cycling to pay for her to fly to Tokyo before she has the baby to recce the course.

What is the Tour de Yorkshire?

A legacy of the 2014 Tour de France start there, the race has provided a launchpad for Yorkshire’s successful bid to host the world road race championships next year. It enjoys strong community involvement and draws massive crowds, with 2.5 million expected to line the roadsides.

What’s the format?

The men’s race starts in Beverley on Thursday and ends in Leeds on Sunday after stage finishes in Doncaster, Ilkley and Scarborough. The women’s event runs from Thursday to Friday over two almost identical courses to the men’s race.

Who is there to see?

The women’s race is headlined by Dani Rowe, Katie Archibald and Hannah Barnes with Elisa Longo-Borghini, Chantal Blaak and Kirsten Wild among other big names. Mark Cavendish returns from injury for the men’s race, which also includes Olympic champion Greg Van Avermaet.

What are the key stages?

After a flat stage one, the women’s race is set to be decided on the slopes of the Cow and Calf, up above Ikley, which gives Friday a short, steep uphill finish. That climb will provide an initial pecking order in the men’s race, which then has a rolling finish into Scarborough on Saturday followed by a brutal final stage into Leeds with six rated climbs.

Is it on television?

ITV4 will show both the women’s and men’s events in their entirety with last year’s women’s race winner Lizzie Deignan part of the commentary team. The Guardian will have daily reports. William Fotheringham

Photograph: SWpix.com/REX/Shutterstock/Rex Features

She is nervous at the prospect of leaving her baby to race. “But having looked at it properly I still think I’ll have more time to spend with my baby than I would if I was doing a normal 9-5 job. I’ll train for four hours and have the rest of the day with the baby and have a month off in October so hopefully it will work out.”

Stephen Park, the new performance director of British Cycling, said last year that creating a female Team Sky was a “real aspiration”. Deignan said she would be interested if it ever became a reality, but that the rigid structure of Team Sky would not suit her. It is too “Big Brother”, she said. She likes her autonomy and being her own coach. “Philip is very much a cog in a system,” she said of her husband’s position in Sky.

For much of last year Deignan was not sure she wanted to ride a bike any more at all after a tough buildup to the Rio Olympics when she missed three drugs tests — only avoiding a suspension when successfully appealing against one test. “I don’t think I will ever be totally over it,” she admitted on Wednesday. “It changed my perspective on a lot of things. It was a pretty horrendous thing to go through. I’m pleased now I have a break from cycling and reflect on what it is that drives me in the sport because for a year after Rio I felt pretty miserable on my bike. It’s nice to have time away from it to enjoy it again.”

She said she regularly asked herself if she wanted to carry on cycling. “Last year I really struggled ... I was thinking why am I putting myself forward publicly to be abused by people just for riding a bike?”

With no team salary coming in any more and no maternity pay, statutory or otherwise – Deignan lives in Monaco and only pays taxes on money earned in this country so does not qualify for UK benefits – she relies on her sponsors. She has recently become an ambassador for Cycleplan, an insurance company specialising in protection for cyclists. She says she does not always feel safe riding in the UK and suffers a near miss “every other time I go out”. She counts herself lucky to have only been knocked off her bike once, in a hit and run involving a car towing a trailer which clipped her as it went around a corner.

When retirement comes she has vowed to do something “less selfish” than cycling. “Cycling is a very selfish pursuit and I would like to feel like I’m doing something more worthwhile,” she said, saying it would involve “pushing for equality in sport”.

She will not start her own team because she is fed up of being on the road so much. Perhaps British Cycling will give her a job, she mused: “Maybe I’ll be the new Dave Brailsford.”