Sports quiz of the week: Wayne Rooney, Mayweather v McGregor and nicknames

p

p

Where are Hull and Wigan? When did Rooney debut? And who beat big odds?

• Test your knowledge on previous quizzes

Wayne Rooney making his England debut at Upton Park.

Photograph: Mark Leech/Getty Images

Conor McGregor will make his professional boxing debut on Saturday night. Which film was top of the UK charts when Floyd Mayweather made his pro debut?

Dumb and Dumber, April 1995

The Nutty Professor, October 1996 Mayweather turned pro after the Atlanta Olympics, where he won a bronze medal.

The Sixth Sense, November 1999

Shrek, July 2001

When did Mayweather last win by knockout?

In 2015 against Manny Pacquiao

In 2013 against Canelo Álvarez

In 2012 against Miguel Cotto

In 2011 against Victor Ortiz In the build-up to his fight with McGregor, Mayweather boasted: "I will kick ass. I don't back down for anybody. You line them up and I will knock them down. On August 26, I'm gonna knock this bitch out too." McGregor replied: "You haven't knocked anyone out in about 20 years."

Wayne Rooney became England's youngest ever player when he made his debut against Australia in 2003. What was the score in that match?

England 5-0 Australia

England 3-3 Australia

England 6-2 Australia

England 1-3 Australia "I felt it wasn't as bad as the result looked," said England captain David Beckham after the match.

Rooney was one of six England players to make his debut in that match. Which one of the debutants scored England's goal?

Wayne Rooney

Paul Robinson

James Beattie

Francis Jeffers Jeffers never played for England again.

Jermaine Jenas

Paul Konchesky

How many goals did Rooney score for England?

47

49

51

53 Bobby Charlton scored 49, with Gary Lineker on 48 and Jimmy Greaves on 44.

Where will Hull Football Club meet Wigan Warriors this weekend?

Leeds

Toronto

New York

London On Saturday at Wembley for the Challenge Cup final.

England play New Zealand in the Women's Rugby World Cup final on Saturday night. The New Zealand women's team are not called the All Blacks but the...

All Whites

Black Ferns The New Zealand women's cricket team are called the White Ferns and their women's netball team are called the Silver Ferns.

Middle Earthers

Pacific Pacesetters

Six British clubs have made it to the Champions League group stages this year. The same happened in the 2007-08 season, when Manchester United, Chelsea, Liverpool and Arsenal joined Celtic and Rangers in the groups. How many of those six clubs reached the final that year?

None

One

Two Manchester United United beat Chelsea on penalties.

Huddersfield Town are the only club in history to have won all (two) of their games in the Premier League. How many times did the club win the old First Division title?

One

Three In the 1920s they won three the league title three times in a row, a feat that has never been bettered in England.

Five

Seven

How did 16-year-old Joe Rooney pull off a 67,000,000-1 feat this week?

He hit two 147s in the same snooker tournament

He scored on his debut for his new football club – while playing as a goalkeeper

He hit two holes-in-one in the same round of golf According to the bookies, the odds of an amateur golfer hitting two holes-in-one in the same round are 67 million to one. He should have stuck a few quid on it.

He won a professional game of tennis without his opponent returning any of his serves

You got…

Challenge your friends