Australia's sporting year in review – success stories and slip-ups of 2017

I n the 43rd minute of the Matildas’ 30 July match against Japan at the inaugural Tournament of Nations in the USA, the Australian striker Sam Kerr completed a first-half hat-trick before wheeling away in celebration. As the crowd showed its appreciation and as her team-mates rushed to embrace her, Kerr launched into a backflip and was momentarily suspended, like a golden rainbow in the San Diego sunshine. When Kerr returned to earth she was a bigger name than when she left it.

It wasn’t the first time an athlete has expressed their joy in such a manner but on this occasion, at least after viewing it through a longer lens, Kerr’s beautifully executed backflip seemed representative of more than just a fleeting celebration, and more than just about Kerr herself. Here was a moment that not only captured but also drove imaginations; one that had children sitting up, taking notice and dreaming big.

Moreover, it was a moment that would come to encapsulate the progress made by women’s sport in Australia in 2017 and the head-over-heels exuberance felt by so many looking on. For all the memorable acts in Australian sport in 2017 – including Richmond’s drought-breaking AFL premiership, Steve Smith’s Bradmanesque batting, the Socceroos’ World Cup qualifying hijinks, wonderful feats by the likes of Sally Pearson, Jeff Horn, Tyler Wright, Ben Simmons, Michael Matthews, Ash Barty, and a horse called Winx – it was the continued emergence of women’s sport from the long grass into which it had long been relegated that was the story of the year.

And it was the Matildas – named Australia’s favourite team at the year-end AIS awards – who were one of the main vehicles behind this development.

But of course by the time they were making headlines, the inaugural AFLW competition had already been run and won over eight weeks in February and March. The Adelaide Crows, powered by league best-and-fairest, Erin Phillips, won the grand final by beating minor premiers Brisbane Lions 35-29. What most stood out were the conversations the women’s game started, the negotiations over remuneration it prompted across all sports, and the excitement the competition generated. That first premiership AFLW match, when Carlton defeated Collingwood in front of 25,000 at Princes Park on a warm February evening, felt simultaneously like a party and a long sigh of relief.

Such is the solipsism of the AFL and its media you might have thought Australian rules football was the first sport to launch a national women’s sporting competition and it was not in fact playing catch-up with the likes of basketball, netball, football and cricket. But to have the AFL throw its considerable weight, and wallet, behind the women’s game seemed particularly significant.

It was surely no coincidence that by the end of the year – a year which also witnessed a strong second edition of the Women’s Big Bash series and the launch of a stadium-filling inaugural Super Netball league (won by Sunshine Coast Lightning) – both the NRL and Rugby Australia announced that they too would be launching national women’s leagues in 2018.

That was some positive news for the rugby union fraternity in an otherwise miserable year. In men’s Super Rugby only the Brumbies qualified for the play-offs in a season in which the Australian teams lost all 26 games they played against New Zealand opposition. That’s some revenge for Australia laying claim to the invention of the pavlova. If that wasn’t careless enough, the Australians then lost an entire franchise – the Western Force.

Compounding the game’s woes in Australia, woes that at times seemed existential, the Wallabies endured another torrid season, winning just two of six matches in the Rugby Championship. To be fair, the Wallabies then stirred dreams of a renaissance, and caused Barnaby Joyce mixed emotions, when they defeated the All Blacks 23-18 at Lang Park in October in the third Bledisloe Test. But, when that was followed up by losses to England and Scotland, a pall darker than Michael Cheika’s visage fell over the 15-a-side game once again.

Australia had a much better time of it in rugby league in 2017. In November, the men’s and women’s World Cups were held in Australia and the home side triumphed in both. In a thrilling and often brutal women’s final the Jillaroos sent the retiring long-serving forwards Renae Kunst and Steph Hancock out on a high when they defeated New Zealand 23-16 at Lang Park.

Hours later, at the same venue, Australia outlasted England 6-0 in a wonderfully intense game that might well have gone the other way had Josh Dugan not ankle-tapped a runaway Kallum Watkins in the 65th minute. Yet the tournament highlight was the performance of some of the so-called lesser nations. Fiji and Tonga, most notably, both defeated powerhouse New Zealand en route to the semi-finals. The last seven minutes of the England v Tonga semi-final in Auckland – in which Tonga, buoyed by the rousing singing of its fans, came back from 20-0 down with just seven minutes remaining to almost snatch victory – was league at its best. It was yet another reminder of the still unrealised potential of the international game and that a world lies beyond the shores of the NRL.

In steering Australia to victory over England, the Kangaroos captain, Cameron Smith – surely one of the greatest league players of all time – capped a remarkable year. In July he led Queensland from opening game defeat to yet another State of Origin series victory (which ultimately cost the New South Wales coach Laurie Daley his job). Then, in October, after being awarded the Dally M medal for player of the year, Smith – along with Cooper Cronk, who would later announce that he was leaving the Storm for the Roosters – piloted the consistently impressive Melbourne Storm to grand final glory. The losing side was the Johnathan Thurston-less North Queensland Cowboys who had stormed to the decider after scraping into the eighth play-off position.

Another Smith, the Australian cricket captain Steve, also had a standout year. For the fourth time in succession he scored 1,000 runs in a calendar year, raising his average to an astonishing 63.55 after the Boxing Day Test. His double-century scoring form, along with the continued rise of the off-spinner Nathan Lyon and the fast-bowling troika of Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood and Pat Cummins, helped Australia reclaim the Ashes in quick time – ending, on a high, a Test year that included a 1-1 tour of Bangladesh and a closely fought series loss in India.

The highlight of the ODI calendar was to be the Champions Trophy in England but that ended up a damp squib. After rain washed out the first two of Australia’s matches they lost by 40 runs at Edgbaston in a rain-affected match against England and their tournament was over before their socks had dried out.

It was a tough year for football – made tougher by the death of the beloved commentator Les Murray. A-League crowds and ratings flatlined and not even a Star Wars tie-in could distract from the FFA’s ongoing governance battle that continues to be as messy as Jar Jar Binks after a night on the lash at the Mos Eisley cantina.

Still, the game had to go on. After finishing fourth behind Canberra United in the premiership, Melbourne City won the W-league title, beating home side Perth 2-0. Graham Arnold’s Sydney FC also had a year to remember. Enjoying the services of Serbian Miloš Ninković, who is proving himself to be one of the best international marquees in A-League history, the Sky Blues won the premiership-championship double and, in November, added their first FFA Cup crown with an extra-time win over Adelaide.

Such was Sydney’s dominance that Arnold’s name was thrown into the ring as a candidate to succeed the Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou who, in November, after months of exhausting speculation, quit his post. That he did so after guiding the Socceroos through the rigours of a two-year qualifying endurance course puzzled many. In resigning, Postecoglou spoke of the draining effect his time with the Socceroos had had on him and his family so it was no surprise when, in December, he announced he would be taking up a position withYokohama F Marinos in the J-League; a posting, one presumes, that will be the coaching equivalent of tinkering in a kerosene-and-wood-shavings-scented backyard shed on a quiet Sunday afternoon.

The Socceroos’ rollercoaster World Cup qualifying campaign that ended on a high with a two-legged play-off win over Honduras was one of the year’s most gripping stories. But it didn’t, arguably, have the same romance as the Richmond Tigers’ premiership in the AFL (an organisation which, incidentally, made a great leap into China when Port Adelaide beat the Gold Coast in front of a lot of empty seats that would have been occupied, believe me, had the people sitting in them not been getting refreshments). Not since 1980 had the once-powerful Tigers stood atop the pile and few would have predicted impending glory for Damien Hardwick’s team at the close of 2016 when the Tigers finished 13th. But all year they were there or thereabouts, stringing their foolhardy fans along.

It seemed Richmond were being particularly cruel towards their desperate devotees when they finished third after the regular season. Surely that would be that and Adelaide and Sydney, the two best teams all year, would contest the big one? Nope. After beating Geelong by 51 points in week one of the finals, Richmond enjoyed the week off before roaring through GWS to make the granny. And with the newly crowned Brownlow medallist Dustin Martin rising to the occasion, the Tigers, all over Adelaide like a cheap suit, ran away with the decider, beating the Crows by 48. Surreally, Richmond’s fans were able to watch the final quarter without expecting the sky to fall in.

Martin’s efforts in the grand final, which won him the Norm Smith medal, was just one of a host of impressive individual performances in 2017.

After years battling injury, the 2012 Olympic hurdling gold medallist Sally Pearson returned to competition and won the 100m hurdles at the world athletics championships in London. The Triple Eight driver Jamie Whincup won a record seventh V8 Supercar title in his Australian-built Commodore. Wodonga’s Britt Cox prepared for the coming Winter Olympics by winning, in March, the mogul world championship in Spain having, a month earlier, wrapped up the World Cup (series) title by winning seven of the 11 events she contested.

In tennis, Ash Barty, 21, began the year ranked 271 and finished it ranked 17 after winning her maiden WTA singles title (the Malaysian Open), making two more finals and beating five top-10 players. Caroline Buchanan won the mountain bike four cross world championship in Italy, the eighth world title of her BMX and mountain bike career. Her fellow Canberran Michael Matthews, meanwhile, helped ease the disappointment of seeing Richie Porte crash out of the Tour de France by winning two stages and the sprinter’s green jersey.

At the season-ending Maui Pro in Hawaii, the surfer Tyler Wright wrapped up her second successive world surfing crown. The basketballer Ben Simmons, the No1 draft pick who had to sit out the entire 2016-17 season on account of a foot injury, made up for lost time by excelling for the Philadelphia 76ers in the opening months of the NBA. And, in July, the former Brisbane schoolteacher Jeff Horn stunned all-time great Manny Pacquiao at Lang Park to win the WBO welterweight title in front of 50,000 fans. “I don’t know who Jeff Horn is,” Pacquiao said when the fight was announced. He knows now.

Finally, in early December, after eight consecutive wins in the Octagon, UFC middleweight Robert Whittaker (at the time the interim champion) was crowned Australia’s first UFC champion when then middleweight title-holder, Georges St Pierre, vacated the title. And just before the festive period, Ellyse Perry was named the ICC women’s cricketer of the year. Just a month earlier she scored a double hundred to help Australia retain the Ashes, a jump for joy moment in an eventful year in sport.