British Cycling to appoint integrity officer in Jiffy bag aftermath

p

Aim to improve anti-doping programme and enhance sport’s profile Announcement of three new roles part of body’s rebuilding plans

•

•

The move by British Cycling to appoint an integrity and compliance director comes in the wake of the Bradley Wiggins Jiffy bag affair at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011.

Photograph: Pascal Pavani/AFP/Getty Images

British Cycling is to appoint an integrity and compliance director following widespread criticisms of its handling of the Bradley Wiggins Jiffy bag affair.

The aim of the role is to improve the organisation’s anti-doping programme and governance structures, along with ensuring “cycling’s standards and reputation make it the sport of choice for parents and young people”.

The announcement comes less than a month after a digital, culture, media and sport select committee report criticised British Cycling for a “serious failure” in not keeping records of the medication sent to Wiggins at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011.

This year UK Anti-Doping also attacked the organisation saying that its Jiffy bag investigation was “hindered” and may have been “potentially compromised” by British Cycling’s failure to report the doping allegations sooner. It was also reported this month that banned testosterone patches sent to the Manchester velodrome in 2011 may have been intentionally ordered – although Ukad has so far been unable to get to the bottom of the episode.

British Cycling’s governance structures have also faced serious criticism, with a report headed by Anna-Marie Phelps last year finding there was a “culture of fear” in the organisation, with many staff and riders feeling “demoralised”, along with a lack of direction at board level. But the British Cycling chief executive, Julie Harrington, and the chairman, Frank Slevin, who have both taken up their roles in the past year, believe they can turn a corner and strengthen the sport.

The announcement on Monday of two other new roles – a cycling delivery director, responsible for events, and a strategy director, charged with growing the sport – are also part of their plans to rebuild the organisation after two desperate years.

Slevin insisted the new roles would help the organisation fulfil its duties of governing and growing the sport. “Making sure we are well governed is the responsibility of everyone who works in cycling but, by creating the role of integrity and compliance director, we are reinforcing our commitment to robust regulation and good governance.”

All three roles are expected to be filled by the start of the summer. After the restructuring Jonny Clay, the director of cycling, has decided to leave the organisation at the end of May.