Sports quiz of the week: Champions League, Tyson Fury and F1

p

p

Who is racing? Who remain unbeaten? And who won big at 68?

What a week it has been in the Champions League.

Photograph: Laurence Griffiths/Getty Images,

Where are Rachael Blackmore, Katie Walsh and Bryony Frost racing this weekend?

The Gold Coast

Shanghai International Circuit

Cheltenham

Aintree For the first time in 30 years, there will be three female jockeys riding in the Grand National.

Which of the Europa League semi-finalists has won the Champions League?

Arsenal

Atlético Madrid

Marseille Basile Boli scored the only goal of the game when Marseille beat Milan in the 1992-93 final.

RB Salzburg

The top three finishers at the Masters were American. Who was the best placed European on the leaderboard?

Rory McIlroy

Henrik Stenson

Jon Rahm McIlroy started the last day as the closest challenger to Patrick Reed, the eventual winner, but he had to settle for a disappointing 74 on Sunday.

Tommy Fleetwood

Which two teams met in the European Cup final in 1980-81, the last season in which the semi-finals were contested by clubs from England, Italy, Germany and Spain?

Aston Villa and Bayern Munich

Nottingham Forest and Atlético Madrid

Liverpool and Real Madrid They could meet in the final again this year.

Leeds United and Juventus

Tyson Fury will make a comeback on 9 June. Who did he beat in his last fight?

David Haye

Vitali Klitschko

Dereck Chisora

Wladimir Klitschko Fury hasn’t fought since the night he won the WBA, IBF and WBO heavyweight belts from Klitschko in November 2015.

Which team has not lost a game in the Premier League since Christmas?

Everton

Manchester United

Swansea City

Tottenham Hotspur If they lose on Saturday, Manchester City will edge closer to the Premier League title. Spurs' last league defeat, predictably enough, was against City.

The county cricket season returned on Friday. Which batsman averaged more than 100 last year?

Alastair Cook

Kumar Sangakkara The Sri Lankan scored a century in eight of his 16 innings.

Nick Browne

Sean Dickson

Which Formula 1 team last won a Grand Prix 100 races ago?

McLaren Their last win came at the Brazilian Grand Prix in 2012, when Jenson Button topped the podium.

Renault

Red Bull

Ferrari

Why were football club US Avellino fined by Serie B this week?

Thee of their players took off their shirts after a goal

Their manager passed wind loudly beside the fourth official

Their goalkeeper was spotted on his phone during the match

Their stadium announcer had been "sarcastic" When the referee awarded seven minutes of injury time in their match against Pescara, the stadium announcer said that 12 minutes had been added on. The league ruled that the comment had been “sarcastic” and fined the club €1,000.

What did 68-year-old Ken Hanson win this week?

A European title in judo

A gold medal at the Commonwealth Games “I feel like I’m 78, but I'm happy to be a gold medallist at any age,” said Hanson after winning gold in lawn bowls.

The Ironman World Championship

The World Kiteboarding League

You got…

Challenge your friends