Rugby sevens continues upward trajectory at Commonwealth Games

R ugby sevens is sometimes viewed as the code’s new kid on the block. That’s not so. It has been around as a sport since 1883, originally developed in Scotland played in tournament format and considered historically more as an off-season run around for the XVs players. That said, when the Commonwealth Games tournament kicks off this week at Robina Stadium on the Gold Coast, the game will bear little resemblance to that early incarnation.

Sevens came into its own when in late 2009 the IOC accepted a submission proposing its inclusion in the Olympic program and the wheels were set in motion around the world as rugby playing nations adjusted their attitudes and launched development programs aimed at Rio 2016.

It was the perfect sport for the Olympic format, which views marketability and spectator appeal among the key factors for being a successful member of the modern era Olympic family. The IOC’s decision created more validity for sevens as a sport in its own right, giving World Rugby the opportunity to reshape and develop it on a global scale.

Its pace, brevity, physicality, athleticism and prolific scoring have pulled in spectators and kept them transfixed – that is those who are not making frequent visits to the refreshment stand. There can be little doubt the stage on which the sport is set is promoted as party central and the colour, costumes and interactive themes all come together to make that a key element of each tournament on the world circuit.

However, World Rugby has worked hard to shift the balance back to an on-field focus while retaining some of the party atmosphere.

The women’s game has also come into its own, becoming the fastest growing aspect of the sport globally. While this is the sixth appearance of the men’s competition in the Commonwealth Games, it is a first for the women.

There are eight teams in two pools in the women’s competition, with the top two teams progressing to the semis and getting a shot at a medal.

Australia go in as favourites but they will not have it all their own way on this stage. Their biggest challenge, probably at the pointy end of the tournament, will come from regular on-field rivals and neighbours New Zealand, with Canada looking to spoil the party for both the Oceania teams.

It is hard to see where these three powerhouses will be challenged, except, if they can hit their straps, by Fijiana or England, both of whom have been struggling to perform this year at their usual top level.

Australia’s women, who won the inaugural Olympic gold in Rio, currently sit 10 points clear of their nearest rivals in the World Series standings having won the first two rounds and with four to come. They are looking to repeat their feat of 2016 when they were crowned World Sevens Series Champions and then won gold at the Olympics.

These Games will be coach Tim Walsh’s last hurrah in charge before he steps down from his six-year role to take up the men’s head coach position, to replace Andy Friend, who also bids farewell on the Gold Coast.

The men’s competition is bigger with 16 teams in four pools. Unlike the regular World Series tournament format, only the top team from each pool progresses to the semi-finals, skipping the usual quarter-final fixture. As such, a cut-throat competition is in store from the first kick.

Men’s sevens has been a part of the Games since 1998 and Australia have picked up medals in three of the five previous editions – silver in 2010 and bronze in 1998 and 2014.

Home prospects looked bright just a month ago, but forced list changes through injuries – both on and off the field – have put pressure on this young team to reach the similar heights.

Captain Lewis Holland was ruled out with a hamstring injury three weeks ago before replacement captain James Stannard was attacked following a social function and suffered a fractured skull. The injury ruled the veteran out of what would have been his third and final Commonwealth Games. Fellow member of the leadership group Jesse Parahi will step up into the captaincy role.

Unlike the women’s game, the top ranks of the men’s are filled with Commonwealth nations and competition will be fierce as South Africa, New Zealand, Fiji (the current top three in the World Series) will be hard to overcome. England and Kenya are also in the mix, with several other teams capable of pulling off an upset on their day.

But the Australian men remain a chance to make it onto the podium if they can use the emotional element affecting the team and run with it – especially in front of a home crowd.