How Francesco Molinari went from missed cuts to Claret Jug – in eight weeks

T wo months can be a long time in golf. Just ask the new holder of the Claret Jug, Francesco Molinari. It seems incredible now, as Molinari continues celebrating becoming the first Italian player to win a major championship, that he spent mid-May searching for answers. A missed cut at the Players Championship in Florida – Molinari scored back-to-back rounds of 73 – triggered a meeting with his long-time coach, Denis Pugh, at the Wisley club in Surrey.

“He wasn’t playing particularly well, nothing was going right,” Pugh explains. “We just decided to do the same things we were doing, but better. Keep working harder until the results come. Nothing was really going right but nothing was seriously wrong, it was just a question of staying patient then make sure you work really well.

“It clicked at Wentworth the very next week and once it clicks for him he can keep printing out the same shots all day long. He plays his best, a bit like Nick Faldo, when he has a feel for his swing rather than too much else.”

That Wentworth success, at the BMW PGA Championship, was notable because Molinari held off Rory McIlroy to achieve it. In June the Italian won again, at the Quicken Loans National on the PGA Tour. He had demolished the field, which included Tiger Woods, in securing an eight-shot victory. Molinari’s appearance on the other side of the Atlantic demonstrated his single-mindedness; he had given up Ryder Cup points by skipping the European Tour’s $7m French Open on the same weekend.

Psychology was again key as Molinari prevailed at Carnoustie. That Molinari could again keep McIlroy at bay was one thing; the champion played on Sunday in the company of a resurgent Woods. Eyebrows were raised at Molinari’s composure.

“It shouldn’t be a surprise,” Pugh insists. “He has played with Tiger a few times now. He knew what to expect; he knew the crowd were there to watch Tiger, that they would be moving on and he would have to cope with that when he was over 4ft or 6ft putts that needed holing. That was important, just knowing what to expect.

“Tiger 10 years ago would have been a much tougher proposition but even now the crowds are following him because he is the main man. You have to accept that. I think he is the best golfer that ever lived and I think the nicest thing for Francesco was to play so well, to win the Claret Jug in front of him. He has the card signed by Tiger Woods. That’s an extra bit of polish.”

Around 18 months ago, Molinari turned towards the performance coach Dave Alred, hitherto most notable for his work with English rugby’s World Cup-winning fly-half Jonny Wilkinson. Phil Kenyon is Molinari’s putting coach. Interestingly, all three key members of the Open champion’s team work with him in isolation.

“Phil has helped him and turned him into a decent putter now,” Pugh explains. “He isn’t giving away strokes gained elsewhere on the course, on the greens now. With Frankie, he just had to be a decent putter because he hits the ball so well.

“Dave has really helped because it is high-intensity when he works with him. Not just in pitching and putting – although mainly with that – but Dave also does some monitoring of focus on long shots. He makes sure that high intensity is maintained. That wasn’t an instant click; there have been a few hard days, they have put a lot of time in together.

“Dave likes to make things ugly on the golf course, he wants Frankie to do things that are not comfortable. ‘You can’t move on until you have played that shot’ sort of thing. Not quite Gary Player‑esque, where he would stand in a bunker until he holed a shot, but along those lines. The one word you wouldn’t use to describe Dave is ‘relaxed’ and the one word you might to describe me is ‘relaxed’, so it feels like a good combination.”

Pugh’s own alliance with Molinari stretches back to 2003. While an Open triumph highlights the coach’s talents, the longevity of their relationship also points towards Molinari’s loyalty. Pugh admirably refrains from cliche when recalling the early days.

“I didn’t really say: ‘This kid will go all the way and be a major champion.’ But what he kept doing was moving up to the next level. Whatever the level was, he moved on to it, secured base then moved on from it. I think he will do the same now, I don’t think he will be a one-time [major] winner. I think there’s two or three more in there now.

“He is a great pupil but he is not always calm. You just don’t see it. He is Bernhard Langer-like in the way he goes round a golf course but he is Colin Montgomerie-like inside. He has passion all right, there is plenty of that going on.”

Molinari’s versatility was emphasised on Sunday, when he hit a variety of shaped shots into greens in blustery conditions. As he was doing so, Pugh was on a long drive from Angus to London; the coach departed Carnoustie when Molinari teed off.

“I was listening on the radio, which is the worst way of course because you have the words without the pictures,” he says. “It wasn’t the easiest journey I have ever made, even with no traffic.”

Molinari’s own journey, in just eight weeks, has been extraordinary.