A £2 maximum stake for betting-shop machines will be boost for racing

T he Racing Post was unambiguous in its front-page headline last Monday, the day after the Sunday Times reported that Matthew Hancock, the new culture secretary, is ready to cut the maximum stake on betting-shop gaming machines – or FOBTs – from £100 to £2. “Walsh hails incredible winning machine Un De Sceaux”, it said. At least, it did in its Irish edition, where there is a thriving racing industry, as many betting shops per head as there are in Britain – and no FOBTs.

The Post’s British edition, on the other hand, had a one-word headline: “Catastrophic”. This was lifted from an interview with Martin Cruddace, the chief executive of Arena Racing Company, in which Cruddace offered his view of the potential implications for British racing of the cut. By his account, these could include the closure of up to 3,000 of Britain’s 9,000 betting shops, and a “minimum” cut of £55m in the sport’s annual income.

These are, as anyone who has followed the long and inglorious story of FOBTs on the high street will know, the same knee-jerk claims that bookies with large retail estates, and trade bodies such as the Association of British Bookmakers, have been pushing for years, whenever the possibility of a cut in stakes is raised.

What is different now is that a cut from £100 to £2 has suddenly moved from possibility to imminent probability, and many of racing’s senior executives have decided to start parroting the same line. The British Horseracing Authority has weighed in too, with Nick Rust, its chief executive, suggesting this week that a cut to £2 would have “a significant impact in the short and medium term on British racing”.

The Post, racing’s in-house newspaper, tends to present these claims as something close to accepted fact. Perhaps not entirely coincidentally, it also shifts thousands of copies a day to betting shops. But there is an alternative argument on the issue of FOBT stakes, which is that in the long term a cut to £2 would bring significant benefits for racing and cannot come soon enough.

One point to bear in mind is that, sooner or later, it is going to happen anyway. The decision – by a Labour government – to allow high-stakes, high-speed gaming in betting shops as part of its Gambling Act in 2005 is now widely seen, on all sides of the spectrum, as a disastrously misguided experiment in deregulation. Both Labour and the Liberal Democrats proposed a cut to £2 in their latest manifestos. Even if the current government chickens out – a move which would see Hancock, the MP for Newmarket, branded as a political weakling in thrall to special interests – the next one will not. So, at some point, the retail chains will need to face up to their addiction to risk-free profits from their 36,000 gaming machines. These suck an average of just under £1,000-a-week each from their surroundings, which tend to be the communities which can least afford to lose it.

When that day comes and reality bites for the bookies, they will have two choices. They can carry on as they are now, whining about the injustice of it all like trust-fund babies who suddenly need to get a job. Or work much harder, at what was their core business for decades until the machines came along. I think I can guess which option their shareholders would prefer.

Some betting shops will surely close if a £2 limit is introduced, but not all by any means. Instead of having six shops to pick from on their high street, racing punters may have three or four, but that is no reason for betting turnover on the sport – which feeds into the levy – to decline. Shop margins, in fact, could improve slightly with less competition and a much‑increased emphasis on sports betting, which would boost the racing profits on which levy is paid.

A much bigger issue for racing is media rights payments to racecourses, which are negotiated on a “per shop” basis. If a shop cannot survive with a £2 FOBT maximum, though, it is not a betting shop. It is a casino, opened solely to accommodate four machines, and the media-rights payments are tainted by the association with what Hancock himself apparently sees as the “social blight” of FOBTs.

If racing loses out on media rights payments as a result of a cut to a £2 maximum on the machines, it will be money the sport has not earned and does not deserve. A return to focusing on betting and not gaming will be to the long-term benefit of racing and the bookies alike.

1.40 Rambling Rector 2.10 Report To Base 2.40 Jaune Et Bleue 3.10 Becauseshesaidso 3.40 Another Venture 4.10 Arthur Mac 4.40 Toby Lerone

1.55 Weebill 2.25 Le Coeur Net 2.55 My Dance (nb) 3.25 Jully Les Buxy (nap) 3.55 Leo Luna 4.25 Be Daring

4.50 Dalness Express 5.25 Mr Potter 6.00 Montague 6.30 Pattie 7.00 Technological 7.30 Abe Lincoln 8.00 Daring Guest