Eddie Hearn offers to lead Super League revolution

Eddie Hearn insists he and Matchroom Sport have the capability and the confidence to transform rugby league’s profile in Britain, but says they can only do so with the full support of everyone within the game.

Typically of Hearn, he has been able to make waves in rugby league recently without doing anything too revolutionary – but that could be all about to change. A throwaway comment that the sport is “on its knees” prompted many supporters to plead with him on social media to help bring about a revival.

Hearn then met the acting Rugby Football League chief executive, Ralph Rimmer, in London on Monday for initial talks to try and ascertain if the two parties could work together. Encouragingly, he tells the Observer that he has heard enough to believe he can make a difference.

“We can definitely help,” Hearn says. “I don’t know how it will be worth our while or in what capacity, but I think I could definitely turn it around. The meeting was good and I really enjoyed it, but I didn’t know what to expect because I’ve made a few comments and the sport’s very close to their hearts. But talks will continue and we’re interested to see where they’ll go.”

Hearn is potentially joining forces at a time when the sport finds itself at a crossroads. The long-standing problem of the domestic league structure is one issue, but there is also a power shift in the sport that Hearn has only realised this week.

With Super League clubs pushing for more and more influence, Hearn is quick to point out that Matchroom can only begin to improve rugby league’s profile if there is a united front.

“In that two-hour meeting I learned a great deal about the sport – albeit not everything – and it looks like a very similar setup to the Football League,” he says.

“The truth is the clubs have the power and without their will to be part of a revolution, you’re always going to be fighting against the tide. The RFL can’t stand up and say, ‘we’re going to do this and that to change the game’ because without the clubs’ support, you can’t do it.”

That Hearn was only too keen to meet with the Observer in Sheffield and hold an extended discussion about rugby league just hours prior to Kell Brook’s light-middleweight fight with Sergey Rabchenko illustrates that he is serious about helping.

The biggest issue Hearn sees with the sport is one he has already helped remedy in boxing. “I’m a sports fan, so how can I not know a rugby league player?” he asks. “That worries me and that’s the problem they’ve got. I was talking to Ralph and I could only throw four names at him: Ellery Hanley, Martin Offiah, Andy Farrell and Jamie Peacock.

“We were talking about schemes to raise the profile of players, because you need young kids saying, ‘I want to be like player X when I grow up’. It’s going to raise participation at grassroots level, it’s going to put more bums on seats, and it’s going to get more eyeballs on Sky.

“Rugby league isn’t hot and if it’s not, while Sky will always do a great job, they won’t be all over it. They’re all over boxing, because boxing’s hot. They love it. Rugby league has got a good broadcast deal and let’s be clear, they’ve got a future – this isn’t a scenario where they’re in danger. But there are kids in gyms saying they want to be the new Anthony Joshua. Who are they saying that about in rugby league? I don’t know.”

Hearn is quick to point out that he is not interested in a full takeover but says the possibility of Matchroom promoting standalone events could be an option. “Things like Magic Weekend and the Challenge Cup, we can add value to those events by increasing TV revenue and commercial profiles,” he says. “We can grow those events, and there’s that side of it, too. But actually changing the game? That’s something everyone has to do together.”

What happens next will be fascinating. It is clear rugby league needs a shot in the arm to help it compete on a national scale. For a while fans have hoped Hearn was perhaps the answer. Intriguingly, it appears Hearn shares that belief, too.