Commonwealth Games 2018: 10 things to look out for on the Gold Coast

Caster Semenya is a multiple world and Olympic champion, the South African flag bearer and one of the Games’s biggest stars. She also competes under a cloud, with the IAAF threatening to reinstate a ban relating to testosterone levels that the Court of Arbitration for Sport labelled ‘unscientific’ back in 2015. Indian sprinter Dutee Chand won her battle to compete but has failed to qualify, leaving Semenya to deal with an unwelcome distraction alone.

Anna Hursey will become one of the Commonwealth Games’s youngest ever competitors, and the youngest to represent Wales, when she travels to the Gold Coast as part of their table tennis team. Hursey took up the sport aged five, and won a match at last year’s European championships. At the other end of the age range is 99-year-old George Corones, who has been given an honorary place in the Australian swimming team, 80 years after competing in the Empire Games.

Usain Bolt may have only won one Commonwealth Games gold – the 4x100m relay in Glasgow – but he will still loom over the men’s 100m, not least because he will be watching from the stands. Bolt’s compatriot Yohan Blake is favourite, while England’s Adam Gemili will hope to go one better than his 2014 silver. The limelight may instead fall on Trae Williams, a 20-year-old from Brisbane whose powerful thigh muscles have earned him the nickname ‘Quadzilla’. Williams caught Blake’s attention after running under 10.10sec earlier this year.

These arch-rivals have 11 Olympic golds between them and face off in Group B bidding for top spot and a likely men’s final against the host nation. Tensions between the teams have been strained since 2014, when Pakistan celebrated a Champions Trophy semi-final win in India by taking off their shirts and goading the home crowd. India have offered an olive branch with an invitation to the 2018 World Cup, but that could be rescinded if there is any repeat here.

Katarina Johnson-Thompson will be hoping to follow up her breakthrough pentathlon victory at the world indoor championships with heptathlon gold at her first Commonwealth Games. She is perhaps the most familiar face in an English team that heads to Australia with high hopes. Gemili, Zharnel Hughes and hurdler Adam Pozzi will all be in the mix for medals, while Dina Asher-Smith will go toe-to-toe with Elaine Thompson and Shaunae Miller in a potentially classic women’s 200m final.

The host nation would not have expected Test cricket shenanigans to overshadow the Games buildup but an early gold rush in the pool could change that. Adam Peaty and Chad Le Clos will have a say, but many of the fiercest medal battles will be between Australian athletes. Olympic champion Kyle Chalmers, who had heart surgery last year, will take on Cameron McEvoy and teenager Jack Cartwright in the 100m freestyle final, while 16-year-old Kaylee McKeown challenges Emily Seebohm in the 200m backstroke. Mack Horton will bid for three gold medals despite an injury setback caused by an allergic reaction to a bee sting.

The 2018 Games will be a landmark for gender equality, with the same number of medal events available to men and women. Of the seven new events added since Glasgow 2014, the rugby sevens tournament could provide the fiercest competition. New Zealand will be heavy favourites, led by world player of the year Portia Woodman, but an England side including Emily Scarratt and Alex Matthews will be looking for revenge after losing a thrilling World Cup final 41-32 last year.

More than 5,000 athletes from 71 Commonwealth members will travel to the Gold Coast, but few will have worked harder to be there than Andrew Newell. In order to represent his parents’ homeland of Jamaica, the South Londoner has had to go to extreme measures, setting up the Caribbean island’s national association and first lawn bowls facility – when the Games were held there in 1966, bowls was omitted because there was nowhere to play.

Malaysia’s Nicol David will appear at her fifth Games seeking a third squash gold medal, with victories in 2010 and 2014 sitting alongside eight world titles, five British Opens and nine Asian championships in her crowded trophy cabinet. The 34-year-old’s domination of her sport has seen her labelled ‘the Serena Williams of squash’ – but she has said she would trade her world titles for one shot at Olympic gold. With squash overlooked for Tokyo 2020, she may never get that chance.

The 2018 Games will showcase the biggest ever Commonwealth para-sport programme, with 38 separate events. It also marks a staging post between last year’s classification controversy and the 2020 Paralympics in Tokyo. Many para-sports are in a state of flux – in swimming, every athlete must have their classification re-evaluated before 2020. That has led to some competitors, including England’s Ollie Hynd and Jonathan Fox, withdrawing after being reclassified or in Fox’s case, finding themselves without a suitable event.