Sports quiz of the week: Dwight, slights, big fights and Champions League nights

p

p

Who hammered Celtic? Where did Yorke score? And which boxer is unbeaten?

Romelu Lukaku was happy to see the Champions League back at Old Trafford.

Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty Images

Frank de Boer was Crystal Palace manager for 77 days. How many days did he last in his previous job at Inter?

85 He lasted longer at Ajax, where he won the league four years in a row.

189

252

666

Palace are not the only Premier League club to have lost their first four games of the season. Which other side still have no points on the board?

Brighton

Bournemouth Bournemouth have at least scored a goal (just the one though).

Leicester City

West Ham

Canelo Álvarez and Gennady Golovkin will fight in Las Vegas on Saturday. Which of the two boxers is unbeaten in his professional career?

Álvarez

Golovkin Álvarez: 51 fights, 49 wins, one draw, one defeat. Gennady Golovkin: 37 fights, 37 wins.

Anthony Joshua’s next opponent, Kubrat Pulev, has only lost one of his 26 professional fights. Who beat him?

Dereck Chisora

Tyson Fury

Wladmir Klitschko Klitschko, the man who lost to Joshua at Wembley in April, had Pulev down four times as he secured an easy win in the fifth round.

Anthony Joshua

What age was Pulev when he made his professional debut?

16

20

28 Joshua, the IBF, WBA and IBO world champion, is only 27.

34

Celtic's 5-0 defeat to Paris Saint-Germain was their worst at home since 1895. Which team hammered them that day?

Donegal Celtic

Barcelona

Rangers

Hearts According to the Scotsman's match report on the night, 500 Hearts fans took a special train to Glasgow for the night and the manner of their victory "exceeded all expectations".

In which country will the Giro d'Italia begin next year?

Italy

Wales

Israel No Grand Tour has left Europe before.

Luxembourg

Tomas Rosicky scored for Sparta Prague last Sunday for the first time since signing for the club last summer. Before Sunday, when had he last started a game for the club?

Four months ago

Seven months ago

Eleven months ago

Seventeen years ago Rosicky left Sparta Prague in 2000 and returned last season, when he made one substitute appearance and picked up an injury that kept him out for the whole campaign. It's good to see him back on the pitch and back on the scoresheet.

Chris Froome's victory at the Vuelta a España last weekend means he has now won five Grand Tours. Which cyclist has won a record 11 Grand Tours?

Alberto Contador

Fausto Coppi

Vincenzo Nibali

Eddy Merckx Merckx won five Giros, five Tours and one Vuelta.

The White House has suggested that ESPN should sack their presenter Jemele Hill because she called Donald Trump …

"A small-handed scrote"

"Donald Dump"

"A white supremacist" Hill tweeted: "Donald Trump is a white supremacist who has largely surrounded himself with other white supremacists."

"A big, brash, boring braggart"

Sergio Agüero scored his 124th goal in the Premier League on Saturday to overtake Dwight Yorke as the competition's highest scoring non-European. For which of his five Premier League clubs did Yorke score most of those 123 league goals?

Aston Villa Yorke also scored 13 goals for Villa in the old First Division.

Manchester United

Blackburn Rovers

Birmingham City

Sunderland

You got…

Challenge your friends