Rory McIlroy hopes teenage mindset will open path to ending drought

A decade later it is the sound the shot made that stuck with Arron Oberholser. “A sound I’ll never forget,” he said this time last year.

“At that point I’d only ever heard one player make that sound with their irons: Tiger Woods. He just hit it so clean, so crisp.”

The noise of that nine iron is Oberholser’s abiding memory of playing with Rory McIlroy at the 2007 Open at Carnoustie. McIlroy was 18 then and still an amateur. Oberholser and a lot of the other US players had never even heard of him. That changed pretty quick. McIlroy shot a 68 on the first day, one better than Tiger Woods, and won the Silver Medal for the leading amateur at the end of the week.

Oberholser recalls the 8th where McIlroy’s ball was stuck on a steep down slope just off the green. “He grabbed a lofted club, which shocked me,” Oberholser says, “slipped under it and lofted it on to the green and rolled it up there to about a foot. I went, ‘Whoa! That’s not an amateur shot: that’s a best‑player-in-the-world shot.”

There are a lot of these old stories going around this week about the way McIlroy played on his Open debut here that year. Trevor Immelman remembers his practice round with McIlroy. “I had no clue who he was. He was a little bit chubby and he had a lot of hair sticking out under his cap. I was like ‘Who is this guy?’ After 11 holes my coach, David Leadbetter, joins our group and he says: ‘Is this kid any good?’ I said: ‘Led, he’s making me feel inferior in every possible way.’”

McIlroy has told a few himself. He remembers playing with Padraig Harrington’s son Paddy behind the 18th green while Harrington was in that four-hole play-off with Sergio García. The boy is 15 now. “It’s so funny thinking back on that day,” McIlroy says. “I think I saw Paddy today walking with Padraig, he’s massive now.” McIlroy does not have any kids himself “but hopefully, there’s a young amateur this week waiting behind the 18th green on me, and I’m the one that’s coming up there and trying to win the tournament”.

It has been four years since McIlroy won his last major, the PGA at Valhalla in 2014. Time is starting to drag. It seems every major McIlroy plays these days begins with a lot of questions about why his barren streak has gone on so long and when it is going to end. He does not have any good answers. “I’m trying,” he says. “I’m trying my best every time I tee it up and it just hasn’t happened.” The game can get awfully complicated if you let it. McIlroy has changed his putter six times in the past year and has just switched it again. No wonder he is starting to pine for the time when everything seemed so simple.

“I love the way he makes everything look so easy,” Nick Faldo said when he watched McIlroy play in 2007. “He tees it up, sees the shot and just goes.”

This was the McIlroy who said, when he was asked how he managed to shape the ball so well: “I just think draw and I hit draw, I see it in my head and then I just hit the shot.” The man caddying for him that week, Gordon Faulkner, said at the time McIlroy was so clear in his thinking that he was “about 15 years ahead of where he should be when it comes to the mental side of golf”.

The best part of 15 years later the 29-year-old McIlroy says he is trying to get back into that teenage mind-set: “It was my first Open Championship. I mean I was just trying to soak everything in and I was just so grateful to be here. I think sometimes I need to get back to that attitude where I play carefree and am just happy to be here.”

McIlroy has been enjoying practising with Jon Rahm “because the first instinct he has is get up on a tee box and pull a driver out of the bag. Not think about the trouble or think about anything. Just, ‘This is where I want to hit it, and this is where I want to go’.” That is exactly how McIlroy wants to play this week. He has been saying he is planning to use his driver here, even though the ground is so hard that his ball will surely fetch up in trouble often as not. He says he is confident the rough is so thin that there is “five to 10 yards either side of the fairway” where he can get away with it.

It sounds reckless. But McIlroy feels that, as he has got older, he has got more cautious. Which is one way of looking at it; others may call it wisdom. But he is convinced it is holding him back. “There is something nice about being young and being oblivious to some stuff,” McIlroy says. “I remember back to when we last played The Open here and, again, I was just happy to be here. I was bouncing down the fairways, didn’t care if I shot 82 or 62. The more I can get into that mind-set, the better I’ll play golf.”

The danger is he is chasing something none of us ever gets back: our youth.