Commonwealth Games 2018 day 11: basketball, netball and sevens – as it happened

p

There we have it. What a day. What a Commonwealth Games.

It was a day that began Australia’s with marathon success, but the men’s race was marred by the collapse of Scotland’s Callum Hawkins. Further home gold arrived in the basketball arena but there was a boil-over on the netball court where England stunned the Diamonds in one of the most thrilling climaxes of the past 11 days of competition.

To nobody’s surprise Australia finish miles ahead on the medal table with almost twice the number of golds as second-placed England and three-times the total medals as third-placed India.

All that’s left is for the closing ceremony and the handover to Birmingham.

The Commonwealth Games action has concluded on a day England’s netballers stole the show with a last gasp gold medal. Photograph: Francois-Xavier Marit/AFP/Getty Images

p

Table Tennis - men's singles

p

Squash - women's doubles

Updated

at 3.49am BST

p

Table Tennis - mixed doubles

Updated

at 2.37am BST

p

Welcome to day 11

And now, the end is near, and so we face, the final curtain... Yes, all good things must come to an end, and that includes Gold Coast 2018. A splendid couple of weeks of Commonwealth gaming concludes today and I’ll be around to steer you through the final golden Sunday.

If you missed what happened yesterday, there was plenty of joy for the hosts again, including in the men’s hockey, women’s basketball and cycling on a road. Australia remain miles ahead at the top of the medal table with England leading the chasing pack courtesy of strong performances on the track and in the ring.

Coming up

Here’s what’s still to come on day 11. Remember, all times are local – the Gold Coast is GMT +10:00 and EST +14:00.

It’s a gold rush today with the last remaining medals to be handed out.

There’s badminton underway already with finals in the men’s and women’s singles and doubles, as well as the mixed doubles.

Rugby sevens is another sport in action all day. Gold medal matches begin at 2.40pm and 3pm.

The men’s basketball final between Australia and Canada has just tipped off. New Zealand defeated Scotland to claim the bronze medal earlier this morning.

There are medals on offer in table tennis, including the men’s singles gold from 12.20pm.

It’s doubles finals day in squash with the women’s from 12pm and the men’s from 1pm.

Australia’s awesome netballers will shoot for gold against England at 1pm.

Then it’s over to the closing ceremony and a farewell to Borobi, Queensland and 11 days of exciting sport.

If you have anything to share throughout the day you can reach me by email: jonathan.howcroft.freelance@guardian.co.uk or Twitter: @JPHowcroft.

There are stacks of medals on offer during the final day of competition at Gold Coast 2018, including in the rugby sevens. Photograph: Dan Mullan/Getty Images

Updated

at 2.30am BST