Women’s ​​rugby is a successful sport whose time to share spotlight and money has come

I t became another momentous day to mark down in the annals of women’s sport in Australia when on Wednesday, Rugby Australia joined with the Rugby Union Players Association in announcing a collective bargaining agreement which had ramifications more than simply financial.

While the announcement of the new CBA was a positive outcome for rugby across the board, there can be no denying the greatest significance is for the women’s game.

There are some of the sport’s diehards who will tell you Rugby Australia had no choice but to give a nod to the women’s element of the Rugby picture. But they are, fortunately, in the minority and are in fact not seeing the modern era of sport for what it is.

This pay deal is not simply tipping its hat at the women’s formats; it is a reflection of a changing mindset when it comes to acknowledging the place of women’s rugby in the mix for a successful Australian rugby landscape.

This CBA is an acknowledgement that women’s rugby – as with women’s AFL and women’s cricket – is a sporting market which in its own right has come of age and is a key part of the main conversation around pay, welfare and the growth of the sport.

For the sevens women, they already participate at a professional level as a consequence of their full-time program, which was initially specifically established to target one major event – the Olympics – and consequently raise the profile of the sevens game and women’s sport, which they have successfully done.

They are paid as full-time employees to train and compete at an international level, as are the men. So for these women, the key words in the CBA are parity and welfare, levelling a playing field which deserves to be recognised as equal and recognising the different needs of the players when it comes to health and lifestyle choices off the field.

For the women who play XVs though, it is a very different equation, as it has always been, given the gap between their format and the three other branches of the national representative rugby tree.

The greatest significance, if not in financial terms, is this agreement will see XVs female players receive the recognition deserved by moving from their long-time amateur status, to a semi-professional one by way of receiving Test match payments and support.

Veteran of four World Cup campaigns with the Wallaroos, Louise Burrows, believes this agreement is a step in the right direction for the retention of current players and will also encourage others to take up XVs rugby.

“I think for a young female who is talented at many sports, she will look at the growth of all female sports, but with women’s rugby offering equal payments for sevens and match payments for the Wallaroos, will consider playing the game we all love,” she said.

Businesswoman Josephine Sukkar has been a significant and long-time supporter of the women’s game. She and husband Tony, through their company Buildcorp, gave the Wallaroos their first major financial support through a naming rights sponsorship in 2016 and have been strong advocates for the growth and development of the women’s national game.

Sukkar believes Wednesday’s announcement is indicative of the most significant shift in focus yet seen towards the women’s game by Rugby Australia, but notes the women’s XVs game is perhaps the most complicated element and underlines the fact that sport is a business.

“The biggest change that is required is in the women’s XVs,” she said. “Australia is not on its own in trying to work out how to make remuneration of women’s XVs representative rugby commercially viable. To begin with, there are not sufficient Test match opportunities for Australian women to justify a full-time salary. Match payments are an excellent start for the Wallaroos. All of us in rugby need to work to create a product that sponsors will want to align their brands with.”

Burrows agrees. “With women playing rugby at a higher level on a regular basis with Test matches locked in each year for the Wallaroos, the team will continue to grow and have more success,” she said. “With success will come more interest and more support. Hopefully with that, more sponsors coming on board.

“Most young girls playing rugby have been looking at the sevens pathway due to it being a professional sport and having greater opportunities. Given the new Super W competition and match payments, I think these girls will [now] look at playing XVs and realise it has a genuine pathway.”

So will an increase in regular international competition capitalise on the initial investment in the development path through the new Super W competition and underline the value of the CBA inclusion?

This pay agreement ends in 2020, as does the current broadcast deal, at which time the strong feeling is Rugby Australia will take a close look at the Super Rugby format and perhaps be tempted to heed recent suggestions to form a more regionally focused men’s XVs competition.

If so, will there be an opportunity to launch an equivalent women’s competition enhancing the Super W format – perhaps a Pacific women’s championship – and capitalise on the pathways which have been enabled over this period?

While this may seem a pie-in-the-sky notion at this point, surely what this CBA has opened the door to is the possibility for thinking more expansively into the future.

Therefore, the structure of these next three years becomes crucial to the success and viability of women’s rugby in Australia at all levels.

Josephine Sukkar believes the key to growth will be exposure of the product and this can only come through the commercial marketing and televising of the new national competition. “With exposure come sponsors, who as far as I am concerned are who we need to concentrate on. Government funding is drying up and we need to figure out how to be more independently financially sustainable. All sports, not just rugby.”

For Sukkar, this outcome is one in which she feels a personal investment. “We are on a journey. This is social change and it takes time and vigilance,” she said. “We must work to bring our stakeholders along this journey. We women in rugby need to make brands want to be aligned with what we do, what we stand for and how we do it. If we get that right, the money will follow.”

For Burrows this outcome has hit much closer to home. As a player and a working mum, juggling the necessities of day-to-day life and training for the Wallaroos has been hard. “We play for the love of the game at all levels, from grassroots through to playing at a state and national level,” she said. “It has always been an honour to play for my country and I have always felt proud of myself in what I’ve achieved. But I think with us being paid, the wider community will now take what we do more seriously.”

Women’s sport, and women’s rugby in particular, is a successful and marketable commodity whose time to share the spotlight, and the money, has come.