Sports quiz of the week: Winter Olympics, history, goals and disrespect

p

p

Who conceded? Who coached? And who was ‘a bit chubby’?

The wonderfully photogenic Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang.

Photograph: Cameron Spencer/Getty Images

Pita Taufatofua is competing in the 15km cross-country event at the Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang. In which event did the Tongan compete at the Rio Olympics in 2016?

Marathon

Taekwondo Remarkably, Taufatofua, who has only ever spent 12 weeks on snow, did not finish last in the 15km cross-country skier.

Rugby 7s

Shot put

Which football team conceded a goal this week for the first time in 2018?

Fulham

Juventus Juventus had conceded one goal in their previous 16 matches before Harry Kane turned up in Turin.

Bayern Munich

Celtic

How did British bobsleigh driver Toby Olubi help fund his training for the Winter Olympics?

He sold vacuum cleaners door to door in Camberwell

He played the role of a hyena in a production of The Lion King

He won £12,000 on Deal or No Deal Olubi appeared on a few gameshows, including The Cube and Can’t Touch This.

He made £30m trading Bitcoin

How did Eric Radford make history in Pyeongchang?

He became the first athlete to win two gold medals for different countries

He became the first Monegasque athlete to win an Olympic medal

He became the first openly gay male gold medalist in Winter Olympics history Radford won a bronze medal and a gold medal in Pyeongchang and then retired.

He became the first ever athlete from the Isle of Man to win a gold medal

How are the Finland team enjoying their down time at the Winter Olympics?

Riding up escalators on their skis

Knitting a blanket for the Finnish president’s newborn son “Everyone is knitting a little square and then we will join them together” said Antti Koskinen, the team’s snowboard head coach. “It has become something of a hobby for me. It means no unnecessary chit-chat is needed.”

Holding up “funny” banners at events where Swedish athletes are competing

Dressing up as the Pyeongchang mascots, Soohorang and Bandabi

Which footballer – who was released by Arsenal as an eight-year-old – was the club’s former academy director, Liam Brady, talking about when he said: “He was a bit chubby and he wasn’t very athletic, but we made a mistake”?

Cristiano Ronaldo

Wayne Rooney

Dele Alli

Harry Kane Brady added: “Through his determination he has carved out an amazing career and he deserves it. He has a character that drives him to improve all the time.”

Who said: “I am fully committed to win the award this season of the best behaved manager on the touchline”?

Eddie Jones

Warren Gatland

José Mourinho That might be all he wins this season.

Jürgen Klopp

Who set up Philippe Coutinho to score his first goal for Barcelona?

His brother-in-law

His international captain

His best friend from primary school

The same player who set up his first goal for Liverpool Luis Suárez assisted Coutinho for his first Liverpool goal in 2013 and his first Barcelona goal in 2018.

Where did Wigan Warriors beat Hull FC?

Warsaw

Washington

Wellington

Wollongong Wigan won the first Super League game to be played outside of Europe.

Why did a few Phoenix Suns players call Golden State Warriors coach Steve Kerr “disrespectful” after their NBA match?

He had fallen asleep during the game

He ate a large bag of popcorn in the fourth quarter

He had let his players coach themselves “It’s the players’ team and they have to take ownership of it – our job as coaches is to nudge them in the right direction and guide them,” said Kerr as he explained he wasn’t disrespecting the opposition by letting his players coach their team-mates during timeouts.

He was spotted updating his Fantasy Football team on his phone

You got…

Challenge your friends