Zoe Smith overcomes adversity to brew up third Commonwealth Games medal

English weightlifter beats injury problems to win silver ‘My back’s been so bad … so I’m actually shocked’

Despite a back injury England’s Zoe Smith won silver in the weightlifting at the Commonwealth Games.

Photograph: Jason O'Brien/Getty Images

From working shifts in a bubble tea shop to an injection in the spinal cord since arriving on Australia’s Gold Coast, nothing about Zoe Smith’s route to a Commonwealth weightlifting silver medal has been conventional.

Eight years ago in Delhi, she became the first British woman to win a Commonwealth weightlifting medal. Just 16 at the time, 5ft 4in and weighing a little over nine stone, she challenged many stereotypes of female lifters. It seemed she was bound for the very top of the sport but since then she has twice had her funding cut and sustained a catalogue of injuries that would cause even the hardiest athletes to reconsider their career.

Hours before she took to the platform here Smith still doubted whether she would be able to compete. “My back’s been so bad,” she said. “I had a flare-up just before I left the UK. The flight here was horrendous, I had to get up every couple of hours to move around. I could not lift the empty bar at the beginning of the week.

“I had an epidural while I was in the prep camp. Since then there have been multiple trips to the doctors, multiple painkillers, anti‑inflammatories, but even after all that, it was still awful. Even on the bus here I was thinking to myself I’m going to go and say hello to everyone and have a wave on the platform but I probably won’t be putting any weight on the bar. So I’m actually shocked.”

She did not have it within her to defend the gold medal won in Glasgow four years ago, lifting 92kg in the snatch before matching South African Mona Pretorius’s 115kg in the clean and jerk to clinch the silver behind Canada’s Maude Charron. But Smith celebrated her strength of conviction as well as her ability to hoist weight above her head afterwards.

When UK Sport cut funding across the entire weightlifting programme, Smith moved to Loughborough and has struggled to support herself financially. She is studying for A-levels in biology, psychology and environmental science and has variously worked as a barista, waitress and most recently at a bubble tea shop.

“It’s been a little bit different,” she said. “I’m really quite proud of this medal. It just shows I can do it when I need to. I’m made of tough stuff, I guess.”

Another athlete made of stern stuff is gymnast Nile Wilson who won his second gold of the week, in the all-around event, despite a hand injury which inhibits his performance on the pommel horse in particular. He finished narrowly ahead of his England team-mate James Hall and Cyprus’s Marios Georgiou.