Racing backed a loser on poisonous FOBTs and recovery will be painful

F inally, the deed is done. It is too late to mend or renew the countless lives that have been blighted by high-stakes gaming on fixed-odds betting terminals (FOBTs), or to reclaim any of the total of about £25bn that has been sucked from the poorest communities in the country over the last 13 years. But the long-awaited – and long-overdue – decision to limit FOBT stakes to £2 does at least signal a start to the process of recovering from one of the most catastrophic blunders ever committed in the name of deregulation.

The bookmakers with big betting shops chains – Ladbrokes/Coral, William Hill and BetFred – will no doubt continue to whine about the unfairness of it all for some while yet. They have, after all, watched and marvelled as billions of pounds in entirely risk-free profits has poured onto their balance sheets since FOBTs were legitimised in 2005. As it would be for any individual or any business, the effect has been intoxicating – and ultimately addictive. Free money is pernicious. Before too long, you convince yourself that you have earned it and deserve it, and that the good times are never going to end. A finger in each ear ensures that you do not hear those who tell you otherwise.

In truth, though, the move to £2 has been a question only of timing for at least a couple of years now. Matt Hancock, the culture secretary, has seized the political capital that goes with the decision, which has support across the spectrum, but had it not been Hancock, it would have been someone else, a year or two down the line.

Even so, the bookies seem unprepared, like drunks after a lost weekend who have been suddenly slapped awake. They have squandered millions on lobbyists and PR campaigns in recent years, begging to be allowed to continue as before, and all for naught. The day they did not want to think about has finally arrived and there is little sign of them having made any preparation for it.

They are also enfeebled, in part by competition from the online sector, which is an issue for so many high-street businesses, but also because they have been neglecting their original core business of betting for so many years. They have forgotten how to be bookmakers, and now need to remind themselves as a matter of urgency. It will be a painful as they try to wean themselves off the easy money from gaming and return to the much harder work of turning a profit from betting instead.

Philip Bowcock, William Hill’s chief executive, claimed on Thursday morning that 900 of their shops – 38%!o(MISSING)f the estate – will be loss-making as a result of the £2 maximum. His aim now must be to spend every moment of the next year or so before the new limit arrives ensuring that as many of those shops as possible bridge the gap between loss and profit. Some, undoubtedly, will fail the test, but since betting is more labour-intensive than gaming, there should be scope to minimise job losses as well.

Racing also has a big role to play here. It has been part of the problem for years, doing its best to keep out of the FOBT debate while pocketing millions in media rights payments via deals negotiated on a “per shop” basis. Now, the most natural sporting betting medium yet devised will need to make money on its own merits, and that too will be hard work.

As Hancock himself pointed out on Radio 4’s Today programme however, “racing should not be financed on the back of this misery. It’s a glorious sport and should not be based on machines which mean that gamblers cannot win.” His announcement of the cut to £2-a-spin on roulette also referred to FOBTs as a “social blight”, a clear sign from the honourable member for Newmarket that racing backed a loser when it fell in behind the bookies and helped itself to a share of their ill-gotten gains.

FOBTs poisoned betting, bookmakers and racing too, and the recovery will be difficult and painful. At the end of it, though, racing will be earning its income from gambling via betting and not gaming, and that is the only realistic basis for the sport’s long-term prosperity.

York 2.20 No Lippy 2.55 Sheikha Reika (nb) 3.30 Desert Skyline (nap)

4.05 Thundering Blue 4.35 Bint Arcano 5.05 Bow Belles 5.40 Victory Chime

Newbury 1.30 Requited 2.00 Fly The Nest 2.35 Baron Bolt 3.05 Sky Marshal 3.40 Nordic Passage 4.15 Al Muffrih 4.45 Berkshire Royal 5.20 Ashazuri

Newmarket 1.40 Directory 2.10 Onefootinparadise 2.45 Nick Vedder 3.20 Simoon 3.55 Alqamar 4.25 Herculean 4.55 Warsaw Road 5.30 Tawaafoq

Aintree 5.35 Lucca Lady 6.05 Martiloo 6.40 Eaton Hill 7.10 Not That Fuisse 7.45 Black Sam Bella 8.20 Winter Lion 8.50 Billygwyn Too

Hamilton 5.55 Port Of Leith 6.25 Mutarakez 7.00 Jacob Black 7.30 Starplex 8.05 Camacho Chief 8.35 Cosmic Chatter 9.05 Highly Focussed