Gary Gold's blazing Eagles beat Scotland – US rugby has momentum

O ut of chaos, Nietzsche said, comes order. Of late, American rugby union has been particularly chaotic: political upheaval at the governing body, a lawsuit from the owner of a dormant professional league. But on Saturday night in Houston the men’s national team put all that aside, achieving a historic win over Scotland.

Of course, in Mel Brooks’ great spoof western, Blazing Saddles, when one character quotes that Nietzsche line another retorts: “Oh, blow it out your ass, Howard.” He was right. Rugby is a simple sport and high-flown quotations can wait for fancier occasions.

The USA’s first Test win against a major nation was a memorable, hard-hitting scrap. To Eagles fans it was nerve-racking, nail-biting and glorious.

There were the hooker Joe Taufete’e’s two tries, the second a remarkable blast through four Scots from a driving maul. There was fly-half AJ MacGinty’s reliable boot and the kick, gather and offload that sent the hugely able young flanker Hanco Germishuys over for the go-ahead try. There was also a great tackle from the scrum-half Shaun Davies that knocked the ball from Mark Bennett’s grasp as he dived to deliver what would surely have been the knockout blow.

The win was never inevitable. It was Blair Kinghorn’s missed conversion of Dougie Fife’s late try that sealed it. But even in the perennially uncertain world of pro rugby in America – attempts from abroad to make a buck, attempts to gather far-scattered players to prepare for internationals – it was a victory that some saw coming.

Gary Gold took over as Eagles coach this year and in the spring the team won every game in the Americas Rugby Championship, against an Argentina XV, Canada, Uruguay, Brazil and Chile. A 62-13 win over Russia followed. The former South Africa assistant’s work has evidently been for the good.

But the Eagles won the ARC in 2017 too, under John Mitchell. A heavy June defeat by Ireland was disappointing but the former All Blacks coach and his sidekick, the towering, glowering forward-flogger Marty Veale, oversaw the crushing of Canada in World Cup qualifying; a promising autumn followed in Europe. With former Eagles and Llanelli flanker Dave Hodges continuing as team manager and former prop Shawn Pittman in to carry on Veale’s dark work, Gold could build from strength.

The player pool is stronger than ever too. Thanks to the advent of Major League Rugby, all the 23 men who beat an admittedly inexperienced Scotland squad are paid to play the game.

MLR is starting small, with seven teams in the south and west. Its short season will end on 7 July with a final most likely between the Seattle Seawolves, who are selling out a small soccer stadium, and the Glendale Raptors, a Denver-area team who own a purpose-built rugby arena.

The league looks well-placed to avoid fallout from board-level politics stoked by the financially damaging staging of Wales v South Africa in DC and PRO Rugby owner Doug Schoninger’s lawsuit against USA Rugby and individuals associated with it. New York and Washington are down to join in seasons two and three.

Those who play in MLR are admittedly not playing at the level of the squad’s hard core: MacGinty (Sale), Taufete’e (Worcester), second row Samu Manoa (Toulon), wing and captain Blaine Scully (Cardiff). MLR is perhaps similar to Pro D2 in France, where the enormous prop Eric Fry runs out each week for Vannes. But it is professional and the Eagles are benefiting while, in a situation familiar to followers of European rugby, MLR is forced to continue without international players.

Gold was travelling with his squad on Sunday, to Halifax for next Saturday’s game against Canada. But on Rugby Wrap-Up, a weekly podcast out of New York, the Guardian asked Hodges about the relationship between the Eagles and MLR.

“The short part of it,” he said, “is that … there will always be disagreement there, because they have a strategy and we have a strategy. But by and large it’s been a very amicable relationship and I think we both realise that it’s a relationship that make us both better if we do it properly.

“We’ve done our best to over-communicate in terms of players we are looking at, when we want them released, in terms of emergency situations and injuries. I think after the season we can put our heads together and talk about ways to improve further.

“One of the things this team can get better at quickly is our fitness levels and we want to help MLR there because it will make it a more exciting competition to have guys with stamina who can play full tilt, late into the game.”

The MLR players in the US squad on Saturday were fit enough to beat the No6 team in the world over 82 minutes played in sapping heat. Given that Scotland recently beat England, the USA will now be confident of beating Eddie Jones’s team at the World Cup next year.

Of course, as Olson Johnson said to Howard Johnson at that town meeting in Rock Ridge, the Guardian can blow that out its ass. Test rugby is brutal and at Japan 2019 the USA will also face France, Argentina and Tonga. They can only realistically hope to beat the islanders – and they beat Samoa this weekend, thus ensuring the Eagles’ famous feat did not lift them above No15 in the rankings.

US rugby is still a long, long way from conquering the oval world. But on the field, at least, it is in decent marching order.