ABC retains cricket radio rights for the next six years

p

Cricket Australia says it has awarded contract to national broadcaster as well Macquarie Media Limited and Crocmedia

Cricket Australia has awarded rights to broadcast games to the ABC and two other broadcasters.

Photograph: Nigel Owen/Action Plus via Getty Images

The ABC will continue to broadcast cricket on the radio for at least the next six summers, Cricket Australia has confirmed.

CA announced a new radio rights deal on Friday, under which the ABC, Macquarie Media and Crocmedia will share radio broadcast rights.

The new agreement gives the ABC rights to broadcast men’s and women’s international cricket and the women’s Big Bash League.

p Sign up to receive the latest Australian sports stories every day

“Cricket on ABC Radio is a big part of any Australian summer,” the ABC managing director, Michelle Guthrie, said.

“I am really delighted we are continuing to forge a strong partnership with Cricket Australia to provide live commentary to as many Australians as possible.”

There was outcry when Channel Nine’s Wide World of Sports reported on Thursday that the national broadcaster was at risk of losing radio broadcasting rights after an 80-year partnership.

Earlier on Friday CA’s outgoing chief executive, James Sutherland, had called the report “mischievous and incorrect”. In a statement confirming the new rights deal he was “disappointed” by the speculation.

“We are excited to announce our new radio rights deals with the ABC, Macquarie Media and Crocmedia, which will deliver comprehensive coverage of international and Big Bash cricket to fans across Australia,” he said.

“We were very disappointed by inaccurate reporting this week suggesting that the ABC would no longer broadcast cricket. It undermined our commitment to the ABC and the ABC’s longstanding commitment to cricket.

“Never for a minute had it crossed our minds that the ABC was not a staple in the Australian cricketing summer.

“Radio has long been an important part of how people enjoy cricket in Australia over the summer, and the breadth and depth of these agreements ensures that people will be able to tune in to the cricket action regardless of where they are.”

Under the terms of the new deal Macquarie Media will cover the men’s Big Bash season and share rights to cover men’s and women’s internationals with the ABC.