Life bans as Racing Victoria comes down hard on doping ring

Trainer Robert Smerdon’s career ended by sanction

Greg and Denise Nelligan also banned for life

Trainer Robert Smerdon, the most high-profile of the Aquanita eight, has been banned for life.

Photograph: Joe Castro/EPA

The biggest scandal in Australian horse racing has led to life bans for trainer Robert Smerdon, his long-term assistant Greg Nelligan and Nelligan’s wife Denise. The other five members of the Aquanita eight were handed lengthy suspensions by the Racing Appeals and Disciplinary Board at Melbourne’s County Court on Thursday.

Smerdon, the most high profile of the group of trainers and stablehands found guilty of taking part in what the RAD board described as a doping “conspiracy”, was said to be the driving force behind the systematic operation.

Stuart Webb was given a four-year ban for his involvement while Tony Vasil and Trent Pennuto were banned for three and two years respectively. Trainer Liam Birchley and float driver Danny Garland each received one-year sanctions.

“It was deliberate and sustained conduct,” Jeff Gleeson, counsel for Racing Victoria stewards, said. “It has cast a shadow over thoroughbred racing.”

RV asked the RAD board to fine Smerdon $100,000 but a decision will be delayed for 10 days as the board takes into account financial submissions.

The eight had been found guilty earlier in the week of using sodium bicarbonate or other alkalising agents to “top up” horses before more than 100 races over a seven-year period. None of the eight, who faced 271 charges between them, attended Thursday’s sentencing hearing.

Sign up to receive the latest Australian sports stories every day

RV chief executive Giles Thompson welcomed the tough penalties, saying it was “imperative that we send the strongest possible message” to those who sought to undermine the “integrity” of the sport.

“If people choose to try and brazenly cheat the system to gain an unfair advantage over all of the hard-working and committed participants who abide by the rules of racing, then we don’t want them to have a place in our sport,” Thompson said.

The group are alleged to have given horses “top-ups” of sodium bicarbonate in order to slow the build-up of lactic acids, a practice that veterinarians have said could give the animal a “1%!e(MISSING)dge” in a race.

The RAD found that Smerdon, as the most senior trainer involved, was the “driving force” behind the scheme while Greg Nelligan was “the architect and, to some extent, the promoter of the ‘top-ups’ scheme.”

Nelligan is alleged to have administered top-ups on 123 occasions, about 115 of which were with Smerdon’s knowledge and the rest were for other trainers. Denise Nelligan, a stablehand at Aquanita, was alleged to have intimate knowledge of the scheme. Much of the evidence before the RAD was in the form of seven years’ worth of text messages between the Nelligans.