Sports quiz of the week: Mo Salah, Mo Farah, maximums and musicians

p

p

Who was quick? Who hit a hat-trick? Who scored spot-kicks?

Mo Salah didn’t celebrate after scoring against Roma but Roberto Firmino more than made up for it.

Photograph: Simon Stacpoole/Offside/Getty Images

Which of these statements about Arsène Wenger is false?

He was the first non-British manager to win the league championship in England

He was the first manager to go unbeaten all season in England’s top flight Arsenal were not the first invincibles. That honour belongs to Preston North End, who completed the 1888-89 season without losing a game – although they were only playing in a league of 12 teams. They also won the FA Cup that season, unlike Arsenal

He released a book in 1997 called The Spirit of Conquest for the Japanese market

He made his playing debut for Strasbourg aged 29

Arsène Wenger will take Arsenal to Old Trafford for the final time this weekend. Who scored the winning goal when Arsenal beat United 1-0 in Manchester to win the Double in 2002?

Thierry Henry

Marc Overmars

Sylvain Wiltord Arsenal won the league title in Manchester four days after they had beaten Chelsea in the FA Cup final in Cardiff.

Freddie Ljungberg

Which of these British records does Mo Farah not hold?

1,500m

3,000m

5,000m

10,000m

Half-marathon

Marathon

He holds them all Farah set a new British record for the marathon in London last Sunday. Steve Jones' record had stood for 33 years.

Which one of these teams has scored more Premier League goals this season than Mohamed Salah?

West Brom

Huddersfield Town

Swansea City

Burnley Burnley have scored four more league goals than Salah. They're in seventh.

Two Liverpool players have scored hat-tricks in the Champions League this season. Sadio Mané and …

Daniel Sturridge

Mohamed Salah

Philippe Coutinho Mané scored his against Porto in the last-16; Coutinho scored his against Spartak Moscow in December – before he moved to Barcelona and gave up his chance of winning the tournament this season.

Roberto Firmino

Blackburn have been promoted back to the Championship after a single season in League One. Who was their captain when they won the Premier League?

Tim Sherwood Blackburn won 64%!o(MISSING)f their league games that season – even better than Sherwood’s famous 59%!w(MISSING)in percentage while in charge of Tottenham.

Colin Hendry

David Batty

Alan Shearer

What happened this week for the first time since 2014?

Chelsea reached an FA Cup final

Derbyshire won a home match in the County Championship Derbyshire’s 101-run victory over Middlesex was their first home win since September 2014.

An English team played in the Champions League semi-finals

An English team did not play in the European Rugby Champions Cup semi-finals

Complete this sequence: Leicester City, Bournemouth, Burnley, Newcastle United ...

Sunderland

Wolves The teams that have won the Championship in the last five seasons.

Fulham

Cardiff City

Manchester United and Chelsea have earned their places in this season's FA Cup final. Which player scored two penalties in six minutes when they first met in the Cup final?

Kerry Dixon

Bryan Robson

Eric Cantona In the 1994 final, which Manchester United won 4-0. Mark Hughes and Brian McClair scored the other goals.

Didier Drogba

The World Snooker Championship organisers have increased the prize money on offer for maximum breaks as it has been six years since anyone hit a 147 in the tournament. Which player made that break back in 2012?

Steve Davis

Ronnie O’Sullivan

Stephen Hendry Ronnie O’Sullivan came close last year, when he hit a 146 in the quarter-finals.

Jimmy White

Philadelphia-born rapper Meek Mill rang a ceremonial bell before the start of the 76ers’ series-clinching win over the Miami Heat this week. Where had he been two hours before the game began?

Performing a Knicks game in New York

Having dinner with Donald Trump

Winning $3m in a casino in Atlantic City

In prison The newly freed rapper, whose imprisonment has drawn widespread criticism from celebrities such as Kevin Hart, Colin Kaepernick and Jay-Z, travelled from the prison to the ball game by helicopter.

You got…

Challenge your friends