Phil Mickelson cannot resist jabs at USGA in pursuit of elusive US Open title

T he world’s best golfers fear being lulled into a false sense of security. Those who have visited Shinnecock Hills for reconnaissance work on a venue that will stage the US Open from Thursday have encountered wide fairways and generally soft conditions. What’s the catch?

The overwhelming sense is that such generosity will not continue. First, Brooks Koepka won the US Open on 16 under par last year, a tally contrary to the tournament’s status as the toughest in golf. It was also 12 shots better to par than the previous year. And second, Shinnecock Hills specifically. The historic and illustrious American course was subjected to understandable ridicule when the US Open played out there in extraordinary circumstances 14 years ago.

Tiger Woods was not prone to outspoken comment at that stage of his career. He led the charge after that US Open Sunday, with green speeds creating a farce. The average score touched 79 in the final round and no player broke par. A combination of the USGA’s desire to initiate an arduous test and a hardly untypical sea breeze led to the bizarre scenario of greens being watered midway through day four. Three putts constituted a reasonable effort.

“It’s terrible, our national championship and they lost control of the golf course,” said Woods. “There’s nothing wrong with a guy being under par. If they play well, they deserve to be under par, but not like this – this is not the way it’s supposed to be played.”

Retief Goosen was hardly an irrelevance in 2004 – he had already won a US Open – but his success in Long Island was not to the pleasing of the masses. It is a fascinating quirk of history that the man closest to Goosen all those years ago, Phil Mickelson, returns needing the US Open to complete a grand slam of majors. For months, the 47-year-old, all too aware time is running out in his bid to add a US Open to a wonderful CV, has goaded the USGA at every opportunity. He was at it again last week, when asked whether the 7th at Shinnecock – a key victim in 2004 – represented “a good hole” for championship golf. “I think it’s a great hole until the USGA gets a hold of it,” Mickelson replied. “I’m concerned every time they get a hold of it.”

Earlier, Mickelson had lavished praise on Shinnecock’s head greenkeeper while imploring the USGA to leave him alone to do his job. There is devilment within Mickelson’s sentiment but he is trying to make a point, he believes, for the betterment of the tournament as well as his own prospects of success. He has dared the USGA to court publicity again.

“I think that this year’s US Open has the greatest setup going that I have seen in my 25 years of playing the US Open,” Mickelson said. “I think that it will reward the best player as opposed to having luck be a big element on some of the bounces in the fairway, bounces around the green, how it comes out of the rough, [and] so forth. Skill is going to be the primary factor.” The subtext: isn’t it?

The USGA can barely afford another controversial championship. Its public profile has not fully recovered from the mess which surrounded Dustin Johnson’s victory – and a botched ruling – in 2016. With the USGA and its equivalent in Britain, the R&A, engulfed in a dispute with golf’s main tours regarding the distance travelled by modern balls, being seen to be perfectly competent is more significant than ever before.

Shinnecock’s 19th century elegance – it opened in 1891 – renders it an appealing championship site. A par 70, this will be its fifth US Open. A Scotsman, James Foulis, won $200 having prevailed there in 1896. This year’s champion will earn in excess of $2m.

Jordan Spieth’s uncanny ability to rapidly decode major venues means he is worthy of pre-event attention despite an inconsistent year. Justin Rose, Justin Thomas and Johnson can be expected to feature prominently. Tactical nous is a Shinnecock prerequisite.

Rory McIlroy’s curious year has featured a stunning PGA Tour victory and some imperious rounds but a failure to claim the Masters from a strong position, plus a more recent but similar affair at the BMW PGA Championship, will naturally sting. McIlroy has spoken of being in the midst of technical difficulties, meaning it is tricky to pinpoint when the 29-year-old will return to major-winning form. McIlroy does, at least, have the kind of fondness for Shinnecock which traditionally serves him well.

“It’s a great golf course, one of my favourites in the United States, if not the world,” McIlroy said. He has also joined the debate led by Mickelson regarding the US Open and its setup. “I think the USGA thinks we’re better than we actually are, if that makes sense,” said the Northern Irishman. “They over-think it. I don’t think it should be as much of an exact science to set up a golf course as it is. Get the fairways sort of firm, grow the rough, put the pins in some tough locations, but fair, and let us play.”

Such an outcome would not obliterate bitter memories of 2004, but would help heal the wound.