Sports quiz of the week: FA Cup derbies, record breakers and Coldplay

p

p

Who lived the life? Who ruled Liverpool? And who rued a missed opportunity?

p The big sports quiz of the year 2017

Will Jordan Pickford have more luck against Liverpool than the Everton teams of the 1980s?

Photograph: Jan Kruger/Getty Images

Everton face Liverpool in the third round of the FA Cup. They have met twice in the final of the competition. Which player scored twice in both of those finals?

Michael Owen

Stuart McCall

Ian Rush Liverpool won both games: 3-1 in 1986 and 3-2 in 1989.

Kenny Dalglish

Who said: "I asked to go off the stage to Coldplay’s Viva La Vida because I used to rule the world and I don’t any more"?

Arsène Wenger

Michael van Gerwen

José Mourinho

Phil Taylor Taylor was speaking after his defeat by Rob Cross in the PDC World Darts Championship final.

Manchester City’s run of 18 straight league wins is an English record but they fell one short of equaling the all-time record for clubs in Europe’s top five leagues. Which side won 19 games on the trot?

Paris Saint-Germain

Real Madrid

Barcelona

Bayern Munich Pep Guardiola was also in charge of Bayern when they went on their run of 19 straight wins in the 2013-14 season.

Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang was third. Sadio Mané was second. Who was first?

Harry Kane

Riyad Mahrez

Mohamed Salah At the African Footballer of the Year awards.

Yaya Touré

West Brom’s defeat by West Ham means they have not won on the league for 20 matches. Which club has gone 32 matches without tasting victory in the Premier League?

Aston Villa

Manchester City

Derby County Derby won just one game in the 2007-08 season; West Brom won their first two games this season – their only league victories since March.

Sunderland

Mason Crane made his Test debut for England against Australia in the Ashes this week. What is Crane’s middle name?

Melbourne

Orlando

Rio

Sidney And he made his debut in Sydney. Pity about the spelling really.

How did Diego Costa fare in his second debut for Atlético Madrid this week – his first match in seven months?

He came on as a substitute and scored within five minutes “I’m really happy to feel like a footballer again,” said Costa after the game, a 4-0 victory for Atlético over Lleida in the Copa del Rey.

He was substituted because of an injury within 15 minutes

He was sent off within 25 minutes

He came on as a substitute in the 45th minute and was taken off in the 55th because he was on a yellow card

Ragnar Klavan’s goal for Liverpool against Burnley means he is the first player from which country to score in the Premier League?

Latvia

Estonia Players from 97 different countries have scored in the Premier League.

Finland

Belarus

The Buffalo Bills have made it to the play-offs for the first time since 1999 – in part because the Cincinnati Bengals beat the Baltimore Ravens. How did the Bills thank the Bengals?

They sold them their best player

They sent them a shipment of 1,440 chicken wings, 90lb of celery, 30lb of carrots, six gallons of blue cheese and nine gallons of Duff’s wing sauce

They agreed to play as the Buffalo Bengal Bills in their next match

They have renamed their stadium the Bengal Bowl for the rest of the seaon

Complete this quote from new Swansea City manager Carlos Carvalhal: "I will look to the lobsters and sea bass but ..."

"... there are too few fish in the North Sea"

"... if not we must buy sardines" Someone should remind him that when the seagulls follow the trawler, it is because they think sardines will be thrown into the sea.

"... must remember that swans are vegetarians"

"... the ice caps may have melted"

You got…

Challenge your friends