Sports quiz of the week: US Open, deadline day and the end of the world

p

p

Who splashed out this summer? Who deserves better? And who sounds scary?

Maria Sharapova in action at the US Open in New York.

Photograph: Jewel Samad/AFP/Getty Images

Which Premier League club were the biggest spenders in the transfer window this summer? Clue: they were also the biggest spenders last summer.

Manchester United

Chelsea

Manchester City Pep Guardiola spent £174.2m last summer and £217.3m this summer. He should really be winning the league soon.

Liverpool

Paris Saint-Germain have paid Barcelona £198m for Neymar and agreed to pay Monaco £167m for Kylian Mbappé, meaning the two most expensive footballers in history will be at the same club this season. Which club was the last to field the world's two most costly players?

Barcelona

Manchester United

Real Madrid When Gareth Bale joined Cristiano Ronaldo in 2013.

Juventus

Five Premier League clubs made a profit in the transfer window. Which club made the most, bringing in £28m more than they spent?

Arsenal

Burnley

Stoke City

Swansea City Arsenal made the fewest signings – just two (Sead Kolasinac on a free transfer and Alexandre Lacazette for £46m)

Tottenham Hotspur

Who said this about his coach this week: "Honestly. I’m not good enough for him. He’s very dedicated. He’s an unbelievable coach. He probably deserves a player that is probably more dedicated to the game than I am. He deserves a better athlete than me. I’m not dedicated to the game at all"?

Mario Balotelli

Olivier Giroud

Nick Kyrgios Kyrgios, who was speaking about Sebastien Grosjean, had just been knocked out of the US Open.

Yaya Touré

Only one of the top six seeds in the men's singles at last year's US Open is taking part this year. Which one?

Novak Djokovic

Andy Murray

Stan Wawrinka

Rafa Nadal Nadal is the top seed this year.

Milos Raonic

Kei Nishikori

Angelique Kerber won the women's event last year. How is she faring this year?

She had to miss the tournament due to an injury

She retired from tennis after winning the US Open last year

She was knocked out in the first round in straight sets She lost 6-3 6-1 to the Japanese teenager Naomi Osaka.

She has won her first two matches without dropping a set

The Bears begin at 11am. The Outlaws appear at 2.30pm. And the final commences at 6.45pm. Where?

London

New York

Paris

Birmingham Warwickshire, Glamorgan, Nottinghamshire and Hampshire meet at Edgbaston on Saturday to contest the semi-finals and final of the T20 Blast.

Bangladesh beat Australia in a Test match for the first time this week. Which Test-playing side has never beaten Australia?

Pakistan

Sri Lanka

Zimbabwe They have only played each other in three Tests and Australia won all three.

West Indies

Chris Froome held on to his lead at the Vuelta a España all week – despite crashing twice on Thursday. If he is still in the lead when the race arrives in Madrid on 10 September, Froome will become only the third cyclist to win the Tour de France and the Vuelta in the same season. Where were the other two double-winnings riders from?

Belgium

France Jacques Anquetil did it in 1963 and Bernard Hinault did it in 1978.

Great Britain

USA

Which terrifying-sounding player did the New York Jets sign this week?

Armagedon Draughn The Jets have brought Armagedon to New York. We thought that was Donald Trump's job.

Pestlilenz George

Beelzebub Davies

Fireball Nevins

You got…

Challenge your friends