Maria Sharapova has steely will to upset unseeded Serena Williams

Rivalry will step up another notch in the last 16, with Sharapova out to end a run of 18 defeats and the American motivated by a book of ‘hearsay’

Serena Williams hits back at Maria Sharapova over autobiography 'hearsay' – video

T hunder and lightning are expected to light up Court Philippe Chatrier on Monday, and that’s only the weather forecast. After the deluge of words that accompanied the most anticipated collision of this French Open there is a gathering conviction here that Maria Sharapova will emerge from her fourth-round match on Monday celebrating her first win over Serena Williams in 19 matches, leavened only by the obligatory nod of consolation.

They might also swap an air-kiss of the check (double, not triple) – or half a smile. They are, after all, mature professionals. Yet, whatever the cosmetics applied in the interests of balance, good taste and commerce, there is no denying the heat between them is not generated by anything other than respect and trepidation.

And what a story they have authored, not as collaborators but arch enemies. They have not met since January 2016, when Williams defeated her in the Australian Open quarter-finals. No sooner had Sharapova packed her bags than she failed a test for the banned substance meldonium – which she announced at a stage-managed press conference in a dowdy Los Angeles hotel in March, pre-empting the official statement by the International Tennis Federation. Banishment followed. For a year since she has been rebuilding her career, now ranked 30 in the world.

Williams, meanwhile, went on to earn $8.9m in prize money and $20m in endorsements in 2016, becoming the highest paid female athlete in the world. The following year she beat her sister Venus in the Australian Open final, carrying her recently conceived baby. The birth was complicated and painful. When she returned to the majors here last weekend, she brought her daughter, Olympia, and wore a black catsuit to help control blood clots that have troubled her since giving birth.

Their rivalry is not an even sporting one but a fight for the love of the fans – as well as sponsors – and their place in history.

Williams, whose hauteur at 36 has garnered some media critics, has some close friends in the game – notably Venus, Caroline Wozniacki and Marion Bartoli – while the 31-year-old Sharapova remains distant in the locker room, not to say regal. Her fellow Russian Svetlana Kuznetsova has understanding words for her but, generally, other players do not get many invites to her photo-shoots.

Others sports would crave such a rivalry. Boxing had to wait more than five years for Floyd Mayweather to settle his differences with Manny Pacquiao. Once. And, while Tiger Woods and Phil Mickelson have honoured each other’s space in golf, even Lefty is now supportive of Woods’s comeback – and practised with him last week.

Madison Keys jokes about Serena Williams v Maria Sharapova showdown – video

Williams and Sharapova are different – from each other and everyone else. Nobody matches them for bloody-mindedness and staying power. However, if they have one shared interest it is their edgy relationship with the media and, in recent months, they have launched their own approved responses: Sharapova in a documentary put out by her agent IMG as well as a sugary book Unstoppable: My Life So Far; and Williams in a five‑part documentary being shown on Eurosport.

Neither would win a prize for objectivity, although Williams does not indulge the sort of score‑settling that marks Sharapova’s output.

“... People talk about Serena’s strength, her serve and confidence, how her particular game matches up to my particular game, and, sure there is truth to all of that,” Sharapova writes of her win over Williams in the 2004 Wimbledon final. “But, to me, the real answer was there, in this locker room, where I was changing and she was bawling. I think Serena hated me for being the skinny kid who beat her, against all odds, at Wimbledon.”

When that was put to Williams on Saturday night after she had beaten Julia Görges in two quick sets, she looked surprised but not shaken. Her response was measured and clever.

“The book was 100%!h(MISSING)earsay – at least all the stuff I read and the quotes that I read, which was a little bit disappointing.” 15-love. “What happens there should definitely maybe stay there.” 30-love. “I don’t have any negative feelings towards her.” 40-love. “I feel negativity is taught. Women, especially, should bring each other up.” Game.

And, if Williams can dredge up a similarly sharp response on court, perhaps it will be set and match as well. She will not want for motivation now.

Sharapova already has hers: 19 defeats in 21 matches. What is remarkable about her – and needs no public relations gloss – is her frightening determination to ignore adversity, even when crushed by a pile of statistics. It takes the heart of a lioness to keep going back for more the way she does. She will scream and glower, allowing not a trace of warmth to show, and, given she is five years younger and has more match fitness than Williams, she will make every point a last-ball slugging feast.

Indeed, if she fulfils the majority of predictions here – having looked devastatingly good thrashing the world No 6 Karolina Pliskova in the third round – and actually beats Williams, it is difficult to imagine she will be able to contain that ice-cool facade for long. She might even be caught bawling in the locker room.