TV refereeing is ruining rugby league – all in the pursuit of perfection

U nlike Australian rules football which is an aerial, 360-degree affair with more in common with Quidditch, rugby league is a linear game. It has a rectangular field, “H”-shaped posts, and running lines as direct as those of Nullarbor road trains. The game’s ball-play and greater action can be confined neatly into a square box: the box called television.

Television delivers league its riches. Nearly every home has a television. Every year millions of those homes watch rugby league. State of Origin games 1, 2 and 3, and the NRL grand final are, in some states, in each year’s top-five most-watched programs. Not just sport programs – all of them. Television is good for rugby league.

Yet television is also bad for rugby league. Because of the supreme quality of the cameras and the angles, the direction, the very high-res look of it, everyone watching rugby league can see everything that happens. And if we, the people, believe what we see on television (and oh yes, we do) and someone else – let’s say a person charged with adjudicating the game – sees the same vision and comes to a different conclusion as to what happened, then we can lose our very minds.

Because yes, there we were on Friday night in Cronulla and the poor, forlorn, ultimately hopeless Canberra Raiders were “playing the whistle” when the touch judge put his flag up by mistake, and the referee didn’t blow the whistle that he put near his lips. The Raider stopped playing, and Sharks winger Sione Katoa ran through and scored, and the referee ruled “No Try” because he wasn’t sure what had happened, and threw it upstairs to a man watching television in a bunker 20 kilometres away who declared that he could conclusively see that another man had not touched the ball.

Up flashed “TRY”. And Twitter hell broke loose, as Twitter hell can. Memes flapped about. Crowd-funding for Ricky Stuart’s fine was mooted. Some gambling mob offered to pay the fine, and paid out its patrons who backed the Raiders. And someone begat a petition to sack the bosses of the referees which had 421 electronic signatures. It was all a bit of a thing.

And the golden goose, the elephant-in-the-room, is television. Television, by dint of being so good, has made rugby league less than what it was. In rugby league’s pursuit of perfection – its quixotic quest to get things right every time or near as damn to it – the game’s been slowed down and made worse. There may be less “errors”. There is, but the game’s not as good.

This is because administrators have made that which makes the game exciting – try-scoring, and the referee pointing to the spot in a karate-chop manner and blowing the pea out the whistle – into a tedious, pedantic, over-analysed pursuit of perfection that it can never be. The game now goes from froth-and-bubble derby to people standing about as a replay is broken down into slow-moving mega-pixels. The game is paralysed by analyses. And even if they do get most things right, the game is lesser for it. Oxymoron, perhaps. But there it is.

Television was once just how watched the game. We turned it on and observed it. Cameras were like robot journalists just there to broadcast the live news. They were never a part of it. Today, though, television is pulling the game’s strings. Today there’s a television god in the sky charged with making things right. You could call it progress. Or you could call it technology for the sake of it. Either way, it causes a lot of angst.

It’s our fault, of course. Us viewers. Us fans. We’ve seen mistakes by refs on the television coverage and we’ve nodded along with commentators who declared that “everyone can see the error, it would only take a second to check and thus reverse the clanger”. It made sense to us, and to administrators. And the great god of television was right into it, keen to show off its sexy widgets, and contribute to the entertainment.

And yet adjudication, for all the high-res, mega-pixelated, slowed-down action, still requires a human being to make a decision. Some people will see footage one way, others will see it another. What do we do? Well, the simple, perhaps pigs-might-fly hypothetical answer would be to just rule on grounding and the touch line. For everything else, empower the refs to make the call.

When these people do make errors, and they will, we could perhaps, just as flying-pig hypothetically, ask that rugby league people – fans, players, coaches, pundits, administrators, adjudicators, the whole blessed lot of us – take a deep breath and realise, in our heart of hearts, that you win some, you lose some.

Rugby league’s well-intentioned desire to make decisions “perfect” has built a rod for its own back. Because when there are “clangers” – as there forever and ever will be, amen – in a system that’s meant to eradicate the clanger, then people feel like a child who was told Santa was bringing GI Joe with the kung-fu grip, only to unwrap a beach towel: robbed.

The Raiders weren’t robbed, they were poor, as they’ve been all season. But fans were robbed. And TV did the robbing.