Ian Poulter intent on leaving his PGA Championship ‘rubbish’ firmly in past

p

• Poulter wants to atone for ‘15 years of rubbish’ at Wentworth

• Rory McIlroy aiming to be more competitive in his off-weeks

Ian Poulter says he has a ‘love/hate’ relationship with the Wentworth course.

Photograph: Tim Goode/PA

Ian Poulter has vowed to atone for “15 years of rubbish” as he returns to England for the PGA Championship. The Englishman’s record at Wentworth supports his point; since 2000 he has recorded eight missed cuts with a 10th-place finish in 2012 easily his best placing.

“I have a love/hate for this place, I really have,” said Poulter. “I love it as a venue. I love it for the fans. I love that it’s the home of the European Tour. I love it for all the right reasons but I don’t love it because of my results.

“I need to change my process, go out and do what I think I can do on this golf course. As a kid I was around this course so many times to watch the great players. I’ve got every part of the game that I need to perform on this golf course and it’s about time I did it.”

Poulter’s response was similarly firm when asked whether he had sat down and analysed his Wentworth displays. “I’m not sure I want to sit down and look at 15 years of rubbish golf just before I’m about to go out and play,” he added. “To analyse it I would have to look at a lot of rubbish. So let’s leave the rubbish behind in my mindset when I’ve got a level of confidence right now.

“I’ve got loads of friends and family here. The sun is shining. The course is in great condition. I’m in good form. So there’s no excuses.”

Rory McIlroy’s is the marquee name in the field andthe Northern Irishman admitted on Wednesday his B-game must improve over the remainder of this year. In the world No 8’s last outing he missed the cut at the Players Championship at Sawgrass. “The good has been very good and the bad has been worse than I would want it to be,” said McIlroy, the winner here in 2014, of his golfing year thus far.

“Starting out in the Middle East, the win at Bay Hill, getting myself into position at Augusta; they were all great tournaments and great weeks.

“I want the weeks where, [if] I’m not feeling so good about my game, instead of it being a weekend off I still have a chance.”