Sloane Stephens and Madison Keys cruise into French Open quarters

p

• The No 10 seed Stephens defeats Anett Kontaveit 6-2, 6-0

• Americans could meet in semis for repeat of 2017 US Open final

Sloane Stephens described reaching the French Open quarter-finals as “super cool”.

Photograph: Clive Brunskill/Getty Images

A happy Sloane Stephens is a dangerous player, so when she reached the quarter-finals, a feat she has now achieved in each grand slam, on Sunday by beating the in-form No25 seed Anett Kontaveit, 6-2, 6-0 in 50 minutes, she declared it “super cool”.

This is a place that generally makes the American smile, she has reached the fourth round five times in seven visits. “I have always played well here,” she added.

“I have never had a bad year here. I have lost to some really great players [Sam Stosur in 2012, Maria Sharapova in 2013, on her way to the final, and Serena Williams, when she won the title in 2015].”

There was good reason for more celebration on Sunday, as she reflected on a run of four solid wins. Only the Italian Camila Giorgi has pushed her to three sets, but the No10 seed is looking in the sort of form that lifted her to a breakthrough US Open title last year, when she beat Madison Keys in the final.

Her compatriot went through to the second week, too, on a warm Sunday afternoon, way too good for the No31 seed Mihaela Buzarnescu. She took 65 minutes to win 6-1, 6-4 and advance to a quarter-final against Yulia Putintseva, who added Barbora Strycova to a list of prey that includes Johanna Konta from the first round.

Sign up to The Recap, our weekly email of editors’ picks.

The Americans could meet in the semi-finals, which would please both of them no end. “She’s playing well,” Stephens said. “She’s the only person I actually watch because I will be texting her during the match: ‘Come on, what are you doing?’ In a slam she really gets up, so she’s going to make whoever she plays play. That’s what’s great about Maddy.”

Keys spoke afterwards about her waning mistrust of clay. “I like it a little bit more now. It’s always easier to like it when you’re in the quarter-finals though. Even though it’s still not my favourite surface, I definitely feel more comfortable on it. This year I have been finding the balance of being more patient but also playing my game. That’s the biggest thing: remembering how I like to play tennis, but maybe adding a couple more shots to each rally.”

Keys, too, has now completed a clean sweep of reaching quarter-finals at each grand slam. She said: “[The French] was always the toughest one to feel like I could play well.” There was very little wrong with her tennis on Sunday.