Sports quiz of the week: birthdays, baguettes, broken records and a baby

p

p

Who turned 160? Who was pelted? And who is too dedicated to his team?

Arsenal have a new hero in Eddie Nketiah.

Photograph: Shaun Botterill/Getty Images

Which football club – the oldest in the world – celebrated its 160th birthday this week?

Kilmarnock

Huddersfield Town

Sheffield FC For the first few years they played games among themselves, dividing up into teams based on their ages, professions and even whether or not they were married.

Nottingham Forest

How many players from the Premier League were selected in Fifa’s World XI this week?

None The team featured six players currently in La Liga (Sergio Ramos, Luka Modric, Toni Kroos, Andres Iniesta, Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo), two from Serie A (Gianluigi Buffon and Leonardo Bonucci) and two from Ligue 1 (Dani Alves and Neymar).

One

Two

Three

Who said: "They threw everything at me. There were baguettes, orange juice, Coca-Cola. I could have had lunch. This is not football, it’s not the way to go. It’s like going to a restaurant and hitting the chef with a knife and fork"?

Mark Noble

Slaven Bilic

Leonardo Bonucci

Neymar He was speaking after Paris Saint-Germain’s 2-2 draw against Marseille in the Stade Vélodrome, where the home fans were less than welcoming.

Ellyse Perry, who played for Australia against England this week (and was the player of the series in the last Women’s Ashes in 2015) made her international cricket debut aged 16. Which other feat did she achieve before turning 17?

She was awarded a degree from Harvard

She made her debut for Australia’s women’s football team Perry is the first Australian to have appeared in both cricket and soccer World Cups.

She won Australia’s Got Talent as a dancer

She sold an app to Facebook for $500m

Sergio Agüero scored his 177th goal for Manchester City against Burnley to join Eric Brook as the club's all-time top goalscorer. Which of these players is not an all-time top goalscorer for a Premier League club?

Wayne Rooney (Manchester United)

Frank Lampard (Chelsea)

Alan Shearer (Newcastle)

Ian Wright (Arsenal) That record belongs to Thierry Henry.

Who was talking about whom when he said: “Every time we win a European title, he sends me the same message: ‘Congratulations for the European title you have won with my players’"?

Pep Guardiola talking about Frank Rijkaard

Florentino Perez talking about Daniel Levy Perez added: "We have become friends because of the time it took us to sign Luka Modric and Gareth Bale."

Zinedine Zidane about Paul Clement

José Mourinho about Louis van Gaal

Eddie Nketiah scored twice for Arsenal against Norwich City in the League Cup on Tuesday night. What was special about his brace?

He became the club’s youngest goalscorer of all time

He only had two touches in the game

He became the first player born after Arsène Wenger was appointed Arsenal manager to score for the club Nketiah was born on 30 May 1999; Wenger took the job in September 1996.

He became the first Arsenal player to score on his debut in the Wenger reign

Who said: “I dedicate 99%!o(MISSING)f my lifetime to try to make you happy. Looking at what happened today, it is not easy”?

Ronald Koeman

Craig Shakespeare

Jürgen Klopp

Arsène Wenger Wenger, the most successful manager in Arsenal's history, endured another tough day at the club's AGM this week.

Washington Redskins quarterback Kirk Cousins was not able to join his team-mates for a meeting so took part via FaceTime. Where was he at the time?

Prison

Doing punditry on TV

With his wife, who was giving birth at the time "We got on FaceTime," explained Cousins. "I was basically there without being there. Julie’s contractions were coming every four to five minutes, and they lasted about 30 seconds, but outside of that I was able to focus and Julie was very understanding. She could hear my coaches and team-mates talking in the background but she said it was fine."

At his previous club, having not yet signed a contract with the Redskins

Rugby union's first World Cup was held in 1987. When was the first Rugby League World Cup?

1887

1954 The first Rugby League World Cup was held in France and won by Great Britain.

1970

1988

You got…

Challenge your friends