Sports quiz of the week: Champions League final, Lions and French Open

p

p

Who won a treble? Who triumphed at 40? And who can beat Arsène Wenger?

Griedge Mbock Bathy in action at the Women’s Champions League final.

Photograph: Javier Soriano/AFP/Getty Images

With the Scudetto and Coppa Italia already secured, Juventus are aiming to become the ninth European club to win the treble. Who were the first club to win the European Cup, their domestic league and cup in one season?

Ajax

Celtic In the 1966-67 season.

Manchester United

PSV Eindhoven

Gianluigi Buffon will be 39 years and 126 days old when he lines up for Juventus in the Champions League final on Saturday night. Which of these footballers played in the final while in his 40s?

Paolo Maldini

Javier Zanetti

Edwin van der Sar For Manchester United in their 3-1 defeat by Barcelona in 2011.

Lothar Matthäus

What method is Juventus forward Paulo Dybala using to improve his weaker right foot?

Hopping on it for an hour every morning

Only using it when playing football with his kids

Writing with it He says: "I take a pen every day and I try to write but with my right foot. I put it between my big toe and the little one. I work like a crazy person."

Surfing on one leg

The British and Irish Lions will play 10 games in New Zealand. How many of them are against the All Blacks?

One

Three When the Lions last toured New Zealand, in 2005, they lost all three games to the All Blacks.

Five

Seven

Which of these clubs has won the FA Cup more times than Arsène Wenger?

Liverpool

Tottenham Hotspur Wenger has won it seven times, as many as Liverpool, Chelsea and Aston Villa. Tottenham have won it eight times.

Chelsea

Aston Villa

Rafa Nadal is the most successful man in French Open history, with nine men's singles titles? Who is the most successful woman, with seven singles titles?

Serena Williams

Chris Evert Evert won 18 Grand Slam singles titles overall.

Martina Navratilova

Steffi Graf

Who were the reigning champions of England when Francesco Totti made his debut for Roma?

Blackburn Rovers

Arsenal

Manchester United

Leeds United Totti played his first match for the club on 28 March 1993, before Manchester United had won any of their 13 league titles under Alex Ferguson.

Who was the first player to hit a century in the ICC Champions Trophy?

Joe Root

Tamim Iqbal Tamim Iqbal hit 128 for Bangladesh but Joe Root made 133 not out to help England win the opening match of the tournament.

Alex Hales

Eoin Morgan

Which of the three clubs that have been promoted to the Premier League won the old First Division three times in a row back in the 1920s?

Brighton & Hove Albion

Newcastle United

Huddersfield Town Only three other clubs have won three consecutive titles – Manchester United, Arsenal and Liverpool – and Huddersfield were the first.

Two clubs from which country contested the Women's Champions League final this week?

Italy

Spain

England

Germany

France Lyon beat PSG on penalties.

You got…

Challenge your friends