Schmidt defends Ireland’s aerial tactics with Australia series still up in the air

Head coach says approach to counter Israel Folau is legal Australia’s Michael Cheika: ‘Everything on the line’ in final Test

The Ireland head coach, Joe Schmidt, at the Allianz Stadium in Sydney before Saturday’s final and deciding Test against Australia.

Photograph: Brendan Moran/Sportsfile via Getty Images

Australia expect the series against Ireland, which is locked at 1-1 going into the final Test at a sell-out Allianz Stadium in Sydney, to be decided in the air.

The Wallabies won the first match after their full-back Israel Folau dominated the aerial battle in Brisbane but Ireland devised a way of reducing his effectiveness in Melbourne last week, although Australia felt it was not by means entirely within the laws.

“We have been looking at a few different things for sure,” the Australia head coach, Michael Cheika, said in the lead-up to Saturday’s match. “We can counter their blocking and everything like that with better kicks and a few different things they are not ready for.

“Everything will be on the line. We will be less conservative than we were in the first two matches. It is a grand final and you can’t win it without scoring tries and playing footy. Ireland did well last week to stop us doing that and we are intent on opening up this week.”

The Ireland head coach, Joe Schmidt, who has made five changes for an encounter he believes will require the performance of the season from his players, said there was nothing illegal about the way Ireland managed to get bodies close to Folau in Melbourne to cramp the player before he jumped to contest for the ball.

“Guys have every right to come back directly onside and we just worked a bit harder getting back,” Schmidt said. “You know when Israel wins the ball you have to get someone in behind it. Australia will have the same urgency: it is part of the intensity of a Test match.”

Ireland are looking to consolidate their position at No 2 in the world rankings having lost only one match in the past 15 months. Schmidt has made two changes to his front row and has had to make adjustments for injuries with the flanker Dan Leavy, the centre Garry Ringrose and the wing Andrew Conway all ruled out.

Sign up to The Recap, our weekly email of editors’ picks.

Peter O’Mahony switches to openside flanker which could leave Ireland exposed for pace in the battle of the breakdown, although Cheika has shifted David Pocock from blindside to No 8 to accommodate Lukhan Tui.

“We have a chance to create history,” the Ireland centre Robbie Henshaw said. “They will come out firing after last week and we have to match that. We have to show the world why we are second in the rankings.”