Sports quiz of the week: Tour de France, the Open and Roger Federer

p

p

Who is ‘mad’? Who hit an historic hat-trick? And who wants $20,000?

p Football quiz: the Premier League’s French connection

The Tour de France peloton face some competition.

Photograph: Lionel Bonaventure/AFP/Getty Images

Mark O'Meara had the honour of hitting the first shot at The Open this year. How did that work out for him?

He hit a hole in one

He hit a quadruple-bogey eight It was at 6:35am, which is too early to be doing anything.

He pulled a muscle during a practice swing and had to pull out

He lost his ball in the rough

Chris Froome is well placed to win his third straight Tour de France on Sunday. Who was the last cyclist to win three in a row? (Lance Armstrong doesn't count.)

Miguel Indurain Indurain won the race five times – all in a row – in 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 and 1995.

Eddy Merckx

Greg LeMond

Alberto Contador

Complete this quote from USA footballer Jozy Altidore: "My girl is mad at me. She’s mad at me and she’s mad at Romero. She’s like ..."

"Why are USA not world champions already?"

"Why don't you score no more? You're a poor man's Clint Dempsey"

"Only I can bite you, only I can grab your nipples" Altidore's girlfriend was annoyed at the treatment he had suffered from the El Salvador players in the Gold Cup quarter-final. USA won the match 2-0 but Altidore's nipples may need a late fitness test before the semi-final.

"Why were you so rubbish at Sunderland?"

Roger Federer has now played 102 singles matches at Wimbledon – the same number as which other tennis player?

Pete Sampras

Boris Becker

Jimmy Connors Connors won it twice – in 1974 and 1982. Federer has won it eight times and he's planning to be back next year.

Rafa Nadal

Who won their 23rd grand slam title at Wimbledon on Sunday?

Roger Federer

Martina Hingis Hingis won the mixed doubles event with Jamie Murray – who has now won more Wimbledon titles than his brother, Andy. In all Hingis has won five singles titles, 12 women’s doubles and six mixed doubles.

Venus Williams

Ekaterina Makarova

Jodie Taylor's three goals against Scotland at Euro 2017 made her the third England player to score a hat-trick for England in a major tournament. Geoff Hurst was the first. Who was the second?

Michael Owen

Bobby Charlton

Gary Lineker Against Poland at the 1986 World Cup.

Theo Walcott

How did Milan's new signing Lucas Biglia respond when asked if he had a message for the club's fans?

"They are paying me so, so much"

"I'm not worth £15m"

"Forza Lazio" In fairness to Biglia, he made 127 appearances for Lazio and has captained them for two seasons.

"Go Inter"

Who demanded $20,000 from Dallas wide receiver Lucky Whitehead this week?

His ex-wife, who says she "has to the pay the household staff"

His former team-mates, who claim he lost it in a game of cards

A rapper who returned his kidnapped dog Whitehead reckons the rapper, Boogotti Kasino, kidnapped Blitz the dog but Kasino says he tracked down the dog and paid the $20,000 ransom on Whitehead's behalf and now needs to be reimbursed for his troubles. It's a complicated case: a lot of ins, a lot of outs, a lot of what-have-yous.

His parents, who say they "earned it by bringing him up"

Kyle Walker became the most expensive English footballer in history when Manchester City paid Tottenham £50m for his services, taking that dubious honour from which player?

John Stones

Raheem Sterling The three most expensive English players all play for Manchester City – and Sterling's League Cup is the only trophy they have won between them.

Andy Carroll

Rio Ferdinand

Which Women's World Cup final will take place in Surrey on Sunday?

Cricket

Lacrosse USA and Canada will meet in the final in Guildford on Sunday.

Hockey

Basketball

You got…

Challenge your friends