WTF, FML and a brief history of sporting initialisms and acronyms

The World Taekwondo Federation has finally rebranded but it is far from the only sporting entity to cause controversy with an initialism or abbreviation

The World Taekwondo Federation has rebranded, but nobody told the sign writer.

Photograph: YONHAP/EPA

The World Taekwondo Federation did the inevitable last weekend, changing its name to escape the “negative connotations” of its initialism.

World Taekwondo, as it is now officially known, first considered changing its name in 2015 but decided to give it another 18 months before accepting that the ubiquitous online abbreviation was going nowhere. The new slogan? It is “Taekwondo For All”. Thanks for asking.

“We know that in such a competitive world we must always evolve and adapt to stay relevant and appeal to young and modern audiences,” said the president, Choue Chung-won, while simultaneously removing a key aspect about the governing body likely to appeal to young audiences. The change came too late for this year’s world championships, which still carry the initialism.

World Taekwondo was known as the WTF from 1973. It joins World Rugby, World Sailing, UK Coaching and many more in switching to a less-inspiring new identity. Netball’s governing body still leads the way in terms of pointless rebranding – from the International Federation of Netball Associations (IFNA) to the International Netball Federation (INF) in 2012.

The Badminton World Federation (BWF) switched from the International Badminton Federation (IBF), which had a better-known namesake in the boxing arena. Fiba, which governs basketball, has a rogue A that once stood for amateur, but now represents the first A in basketball. Helpfully, it also stops its initialism from spelling FIB. The International Volleyball Federation, meanwhile, is still known by its French abbreviation, FIVB.

In the UK the ASA (Amateur Swimming Association) presumably grew tired of getting complaints about ads, and rebranded as Swim England this year. The British Mountaineers’ Council (BMC) switched to Climb Britain – unremarkable, you might think, but angry hill walkers launched an unsuccessful petition to reinstate the old name.

The Football League also caused consternation with its change to EFL – a name that, for some, was a little too close to the EDL. Cardiff City fans were unhappy for a different reason. Not all initialisms and acronyms are so thoughtless – take the National Union of Track Statisticians (Nuts) or the Women’s International Squash Players’ Association (Wispa).

Most famous of all is the WWE and that long-running beef with conservation charity, the WWF. The wrestling organisation changed its name after a long legal battle – but the charity initially argued its new logo was too similar. Thankfully the two groups never had to settle their differences in the squared circle.

Some shorthand terms that are inoffensive in their host country have very different connotations abroad. The US Intercollegiate Rowing Association (IRA) may not immediately appreciate the issues their name might cause across the pond – and the same could be said of Bosnian skating organisation, the Klizacko Koturalijski Klub.

German football club Kaiserlautern and Danish side FC Copenhagen both sail close to the wind with the abbreviation ‘FCK’, while a new handball venue in Lund, Sweden, was christened the Färs och Frosta Sparbanken Arena – or FFS Arena for short. Finally, the Michigan high school tournament known as the Flint Metro League (FML) may want to contact World Taekwondo for advice on rebranding in the online age.