Lewis Hamilton guided by faith and perspective for new F1 challenges

Lewis Hamilton knows that risk is part of his business but has revealed that while his passion for Formula One is as strong as ever, he believes it is not worth dying for. As he prepares for this weekend’s British Grand Prix, the four-time world champion also emphasised the importance of his faith and despite the danger inherent in the sport, that: “God has his hand over me”.

Hamilton is now in his 12th season in F1 and is expected shortly to confirm an extension to his contract with Mercedes for a further two years. He made his debut in 2007, when he was 22 years old, and took his first title in 2008 for McLaren, scoring three more with Mercedes in 2014, 2015 and 2017. Now one of the most experienced and successful drivers on the grid, he insists his enthusiasm is undiminished but tempered as part of a broader perspective on life.

“I love racing,” he said in a podcast released on Wednesday. “I wouldn’t say F1 is worth dying for. Your dream, passion, ambition and goals can be worth dying for.”

Hamilton had been greatly moved by a fan who told him she had cancer and was undergoing chemotherapy during his debut season and that his performances inspired her recovery.

“It is hard to grasp that and to imagine what she is going through but she grabbed on to something,” he said. “That was maybe this young kid coming from nowhere but facing adversity, somehow fighting through it. That’s definitely worth fighting for, that’s definitely worth dying for, if you can touch one kid and put them on course for their potential.”

Hamilton goes into the race at Silverstone, the third leg of F1’s first triple header after France and Austria, after a frustrating meeting at the Red Bull Ring. The Mercedes driver was forced to retire there and his 14-point lead in the world championship became a one-point deficit to Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel.

The 33-year-old has always been open about his Christian faith and believes it plays a major role in his life and his racing. At the Nurburgring in 2007 during qualifying, a wheel nut that had not been located correctly caused his tyre to blow under heavy loading into turn eight at 160mph and his car to spear nose-first into the barrier. It illustrated the danger he knows is a constant companion in F1.

“You don’t have time to pray,” he said of such incidents. “Anything can happen any day, but I feel God has his hand over me.” It is a belief strengthened by regular prayer and attendance at church. “I go with a couple of my close friends,” he said. “We meet, we go for breakfast and then we go to church together. We leave most often feeling enlightened and empowered, it’s like a re-centring.”

Hamilton has matured as a driver and is at the peak of his powers, which are being put to the test for the second season in a row in a close title fight with Vettel, also a four-time world champion. The pair have exchanged the championship lead five times this year in nine races and intriguingly, drawing on Star Wars, Hamilton believes he is better able to deal with the battle mentally than ever.

“My attitude to risk, in a sense it is more controlled, more calculated risk,” he said. “Whereas when I was a kid it was just pure adrenaline and pure balls. I have still got that, but I have also got the mental side. I am stronger in my mind than ever. It is almost like you can relate it to the movie with the force. He has the force within him but doesn’t know how to utilise it. I have the force within me but now I can control it.”

That reaching this point has not been easy is well documented but Hamilton was also honest about how much opposition he faced, even as a child. “Parents of other drivers would say: ’You’re not good enough’. Grown adults telling an eight-year-old: ’You just don’t have it.’ It knocked me back,” he said. “I struggled at school, I was dyslexic and I was always behind because I was racing. My headmaster was a complete arsehole. He didn’t agree to me taking time off to race and would put me in detention for the day. I hated school.”

Hamilton goes to the British Grand Prix as strong favourite, with the chance to surpass Jim Clark and Alain Prost with his sixth win at the race but is taking nothing for granted. With team errors costing him at three races this season, he sees the travails he has suffered as part of the sport.

“Formula One has given me a life, given me a purpose, which is pretty special. But F1 has also broken me. It’s broken me and built me, broken me and built me,” he said. “When you go through it, you put so much into it, it breaks your heart and kills you when you fail, when you stumble, when everyone’s watching when you stumble. But, when you get back up and when you succeed it lifts you up.”