From drugs and alcohol to wellbeing: how rugby league is tackling mental health

I t did not take Paul Highton long to realise something was wrong. “On Sunday I’d played my last game, retired, and by Monday or Tuesday I was sat on the couch thinking: ‘Is this it now?’” the former Halifax and Salford forward recalls. In 2009, Highton’s 20-year career came to an abrupt end and, having struggled to integrate back into everyday life, he turned to substance abuse.

“I was really struggling,” he says. “That led me to alcohol and taking prescription drugs to cope with the fact I wasn’t playing anymore.” Highton’s story could have easily had an unhappy ending but, shortly after things began to spiral out of control, he got the call that changed his life.

Highton visited Sporting Chance and soon after was contacted by State of Mind. Suicide remains the biggest killer of men under 45 in the UK, and the charity was founded amid tragic circumstances in 2011, when the former Great Britain hooker Terry Newton took his own life. Dedicated to raising awareness of mental health issues in the typically macho environment of rugby league and encouraging players to talk, this weekend features the latest dedicated State of Mind round in Super League.

Highton, now both an ambassador for the charity and Salford’s player welfare manager having rebuilt his life, is only too aware of the difference it has made to rugby league. “In our club alone, I get our leadership group asking me to speak to certain players if they don’t seem right or they’re struggling. I’m not sure that would have happened a few years ago,” Highton says.

But State of Mind’s reach is not strictly limited to players. Part of the ultimate goal is helping everyone involved in the sport adjust to life away from rugby league – something the former Super League referee Ian Smith can attest to being more difficult than he first envisaged.

The wellbeing of match officials is rarely considered in most emotionally charged sports, a category into which rugby league firmly falls. And when Smith suddenly found himself out of work following a restructure of the Rugby Football League’s refereeing department in 2016, the 52-year-old had nowhere to turn. “Not only was it my income stream, it was my love, my passion,” he tells the Guardian. “I felt like I lost my identity, to be brutally honest.

“I just wanted to isolate myself; I had no reason to get up and go to work. Eventually I did get a job, but that adrenaline wasn’t there. I was lost – I needed help.” Like Highton, Smith sought help with Sporting Chance before State of Mind reached out. And like Highton, Smith now leads motivational talks on the benefits State of Mind can provide.

“It’s given me purpose and focus back in my life,” he says. “Highton asked if I wanted to do some presenting for them and it’s rocketed from there.”

Smith also reached out to the RFL’s match officials department recently to offer help to the current group of officials in dealing with abuse. “I didn’t deal with the abuse,” he recalls. “Walking back to your car after a game, to have stewards escorting me back … that was tough. My parents didn’t see me referee a game in my last eight years as an official because they couldn’t take hearing their son being abused by people.

“Players will make mistakes, but referees seemingly can’t. There’s a human behind the uniform that cries, that bleeds and that has a family. Just think about what you’re shouting on the terraces sometimes – that’s my plea. We’re trying to raise awareness of issues like that.”

Such has been the success of State of Mind, the likes of Highton and Smith now take the concept into other walks of life, such as, in Smith’s words, “alpha-male organisations” such as those in construction. “Rugby league should be very proud that we can use our sport as a driving force to the masses,” Highton says. “It doesn’t matter how flash your car is or how rich you are: mental health does not discriminate.”

The goal for State of Mind at its foundation was to save one life; to stop one player from feeling like the worst option was the only option. The likes of Highton and Smith are living, breathing proof that in rugby league, the taboo is being eroded as the charity prepares to take over Super League again this week.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org . In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org .