Sports quiz of the week: Unai Emery, Liverpool and a dirty mouth

p

p

Who beat Real Madrid? Who can’t count? Who petitioned Fifa?

New Arsenal boss Unai Emery.

Photograph: Stuart MacFarlane/Arsenal/Getty Images

Who scored two goals against Real Madrid in the European Cup in the 1980-81 season, when Liverpool won the trophy?

Alan Kennedy

Karl Kennedy

Susan Kennedy

Des Kennedy Alan Kennedy scored one for Liverpool in the final; Des Kennedy scored two for Limerick in the first round; Karl and Susan Kennedy are fictional characters

Which of these players has won the Champions League with both Liverpool and Real Madrid?

Steve McManaman

Nicolas Anelka

Xabi Alonso He scored the equalising goal in the 2005 final (after Steven Gerrard had dived for a penalty). He won it with Real Madrid in 2014.

Álvaro Arbeloa

Fernando Morientes

Michael Owen

Zinedine Zidane is aiming to lead his club to three straight European Cups. Which other manager has achieved this feat?

Bob Paisley

Carlo Ancelotti

Pep Guardiola

Brian Clough

No one. He would be the first Paisley and Ancelotti have both won three as managers but neither of them did it in successive seasons.

Why was Stephen Curry’s mother Sonya unimpressed by his performance for the Golden State Warriors against the Houston Rockets this week?

He was caught swearing on TV Curry, who had shouted “this is my fucking house” during the match, admitted his mother had a point. “She's right. I gotta do better. I can't talk like that. She was telling me how I need to wash my mouth out, saying to wash it out with soap.”

He did not wave to her in the crowd

He only scored 40 points

He “passed the ball to team-mates too much”

Unai Emery has won three European trophies. How many have Arsenal won?

None

Two Emery won three in three years at Sevilla. Arsenal have been around 132 years but have only won the Cup-Winners' Cup and the Inter-Cities Fairs Cup.

Four

Six

In which city will a man from Majorca and a woman from Riga start defending their titles on Sunday?

London

Paris Rafa Nadal and Jelena Ostapenko will be defending their singles titles at the French Open.

Melbourne

New York

Who said: "Right now I have a biological age of 23. I can keep playing until I'm 41”?

Rafa Nadal

Zlatan Ibrahimovic

Cristiano Ronaldo His "biological age" may be 23, but his actual age is 33.

Roger Federer

What request did France captain Hugo Lloris, Australia captain Mile Jedinak and Denmark captain Simon Kjaer make to Fifa this week?

To "show compassion" to an opponent who has been banned for taking cocaine The three captains of the teams Peru will face at the World Cup joined forces to help their captain, Paolo Guerrero, who has been banned for 14 months after testing positive for cocaine – apparently from a tea he drank.

To change the times of their matches at the World Cup

To let them sing the full versions of their national anthems at the World Cup

To grant their fans more tickets for World Cup matches

What is notable about the Vegas Golden Knights’ appearance in the final of the Stanley Cup?

Their coach said he would ‘gamble every cent he owns on the strip’ if they made it this far

Every member of their squad is a teenager

The team are owned by Floyd Mayweather, who bought them for $1

This is their first ever season Las Vegas was the largest city in the US without a major sports franchise until the Golden Knights, the NHL's first expansion team in 17 years, broke ice in the desert last year.

The Women's Champions League final was goalless after 90 minutes. What was the score after 120 minutes?

Wolfsburg 1-4 Lyon Lyon fought back from 1-0 down in extra time to win their fifth title in a row.

Wolfsburg 2-6 Lyon

Wolfsburg 4-3 Lyon

Wolfsburg 3-2 Lyon

You got…

Challenge your friends