'Exhausting and traumatizing': Aly Raisman on the toll of the Nassar abuse case

p

Former USA Gymnastics doctor abused dozens of athletes

Raisman was one of most prominent Nassar accusers

Aly Raisman gave evidence during the sentence hearing for Larry Nassar.

Photograph: Brendan Mcdermid/Reuters

Aly Raisman has spoken about the after-effects of the abuse she says she suffered at the hands of disgraced former USA Gymnastics doctor Larry Nassar.

Nassar will spend the rest of his life in prison after pleading guilty to sexually assaulting women and girls under the guise of medical treatment. Dozens of athletes say they were abused by Nassar, including Olympians such as Raisman and Simone Biles.

Raisman was one of the most high-profile women to appear in court to testify against Nassar, and she says the case has taken its toll. “It is exhausting and traumatizing,” she told the Improper Bostonian magazine.  “I’m constantly reliving my abuse, and the last couple of months were extra-draining. I first spoke up back in August and I came forward with my story in November. I was so sick and so nervous. I don’t know if people understand how hard it is to do that. I could hold it together in court or whatever, but then I could barely hold my head up afterward. In the past few months, I’ve barely worked out, which for someone who loves working out, that’s saying a lot. But the exhaustion is incredible, especially because you’re dealing with a serious issue and you always have to be on.”

In March, Raisman filed a lawsuit against the US Olympic Committee and USA Gymnastics alleging the organizations failed to protect athletes from Nassar. In the interview with the Improper Bostonian she said she would be skeptical of allowing her child to be involved in gymnastics in its current format. “Only if USA Gymnastics and the US Olympic Committee were willing to work with us and make changes and take a hard look at what’s gone on. They’ve been silent. And it’s not just in gymnastics but other sports. They’re ignoring this problem. But if they were willing to make a change – which obviously the people in charge don’t care – I would,” she said.

Nassar was sentenced to up to 300 years in prison for his crimes, in addition to a 60-year term for possession of child abuse images.