Patriots considered Baker Mayfield as Tom Brady's successor, claims agent

Jack Mills says New England thought about trading up for quarterback

Mayfield was selected No1 overall by Cleveland Browns

Tom Brady entered the NFL in 2000.

Photograph: Cj Gunther/EPA

Baker Mayfield’s agent says the New England Patriots and New York Jets were both in the market for his client before the quarterback was drafted No1 overall by the Cleveland Browns last weekend.

The Jets ended up picking Sam Darnold in the No3 spot but Jack Mills told the Business of Sports podcast that the team would have preferred the former Oklahoma star. “When he visited the Jets, they pretty much said you’re our guy if you’re [still available at No3],” Mills said.

Mills added that the Patriots had also considered trading up for Mayfield as an eventual successor for Tom Brady, who will be 41 when the new season starts. “We had another team which is going to surprise you. Another team had said, ‘You may get a big surprise on draft day, at No2, if he’s available.’ And it was the Patriots,” Mills said. “They had [the 23rd and 31st picks] and they had two seconds [to decide whether to trade up]. We thought, ‘That’s gonna be a heck of a move, to get up that high from where they are.’ And of course he wasn’t available so we never knew if that was a reality or not.”

The Patriots ended up selecting quarterback Danny Etling in the seventh-round, although he is not considered to be a realistic candidate to replace Brady.

While much of focus of the last week has been on the new generation of quarterbacks drafted into the NFL, Brady says he intends to continue playing well into his fifth decade.

In an appearance at the Milken Institute Global Conference on Monday, Brady confirmed he will be back for the 2018 season and beyond after speculation his career would soon draw to a close. “I have personal goals,” the quarterback said. “I want to keep playing. I’ve said for a long time I want to play to my mid-40s. I was told three years, when I was 36-37, ‘You can’t keep playing; no one wins Super Bowls [at that age].’ It’s a great challenge for me.”

In January, the New England Patriots denied reports a rift had formed between team owner Robert Kraft, coach Bill Belichick and Brady. On Monday, Brady was asked if he was happy with the people he works with. “Yeah,” he said. “I would say absolutely. And in general, I’m a very happy person. I’m a very positive person. It’s just my personality, I always look at things as the glass is half full. I think there are different times; when you’ve been on the same team for a long time, you have relationships for a long time, they ebb and flow like every relationship”.”

Brady will miss the Patriots’ voluntary pre-season workouts and acknowledged that his family have got “the short end of the stick in my life” due to to his commitment to football. His wife, Gisele Bundchen, has said in the past that she worries about the toll the sport takes on her husband’s body.

Brady led the Patriots to a Super Bowl appearance last season but was denied a sixth championship victory by the Philadelphia Eagles.