Defeat at Headingley could spell big trouble for England and coach Bayliss

T he Headingley Test has become a spicier match than was ever anticipated at the start of the summer. England were so dire at Lord’s, so emphatically beaten by the side ranked No 7 in the world, that the calls for upheaval will reach a deafening level if England lose again in Leeds.

Suddenly jobs are at stake. Another defeat and there will be more demands for heads to roll. The usual reaction and the one that is familiar whenever a football side are losing is simple: sack the coach. In any case, in this instance, it is Trevor Bayliss’s turn. Joe Root was appointed captain only 15 months ago; Ed Smith, the national selector, one month ago. If England slump again, Bayliss is most obviously in the firing line.

The fact that cricket operates in a completely different way from football will be ignored as this inconveniently muddies the waters. In football the manager/coach makes all the major on-pitch decisions and the results dictate whether he stays or goes. Apply those principles to the current situation with the England cricket team and there is scope for confusion.

England are ranked the best side in the world in ODI cricket so coach Bayliss must be brilliant; England will be ranked No 7 in the world in Test cricket if they lose at Headingley, so coach Bayliss must be hopeless.

Something does not tally. The two forms of the game are not so radically different that a coach can be excellent when there is a white ball and execrable with a red one. In reality England’s plight demonstrates the limitations of the coach in cricket. To a large extent his success is dependent on the quality of the personnel at his disposal. Currently England have discovered some dynamic, confident cricketers, intuitively led on the field by Eoin Morgan in one-day cricket, but their Test team is nowhere near as well endowed.

There are pragmatic reasons why ditching Bayliss as the Test coach is fraught with difficulty. For a start, who would sack him? Theoretically that is the job of the cricket director, who is Andrew Strauss, but he is on compassionate leave and has just been replaced by Andy Flower. Can the locum take such a major decision, especially when he would be a candidate to plug the gap in any interregnum?

Tom Harrison, the chief executive of the England and Wales Cricket Board, could intervene, though he already has a hundred problems mounting up on his desk.

In addition it might be a costly exercise to terminate/reduce Bayliss’s contract. The wise words of Tommy Docherty spring to mind: “What you need to prosper in this business [football management] is a bad team and a damn good contract.” This echoes Bayliss’s position with the Test team.

So there would be huge relief at the beleaguered ECB if England could square the series at Headingley but there is no guarantee of that, especially since the fitness of Ben Stokes is in doubt. There is constant talk of his totemic presence within the side, though in blunt figures his contributions in the three Tests he has played since his enforced absence are modest – 150 runs at an average of 25 and three wickets.

However, Stokes bowled with vigour at Lord’s and at least he looked as if he was going to score runs. There is the possibility that he could play at Headingley as a batsman only, which would not be good news for Dawid Malan.

The call-up of Sam Curran, Surrey’s left-handed all-rounder, as cover for Stokes is another bold selection. He is only 19 but is twice as experienced as Dom Bess since he has played 38 first-class matches as opposed to 17 and, unlike Bess, he has been among the wickets this season, taking 10 at the Oval against Yorkshire, including that of Root. Like his older brother Tom, Sam does not give the impression that he is easily overawed. He has steely eyes. As a bowler he lacks pace and height but he does have the capacity to swing the ball back in to the right-handers, which on his day can deliver lbws.

His method recalls that of Mike Smith, the Gloucestershire left-armer, who played his solitary Test at Headingley in 1997 against Australia. A catch was dropped by Graham Thorpe in his third over, Matthew Elliott made 199 and Smith ended up wicketless. It was just about the only day that season that Smith was unable to get the ball to swing. Curran, who is also a promising batsman well beyond Smith’s capabilities, will hope for better luck if he plays.

If Stokes is sidelined or unable to bowl and Curran is selected, then the chances of Chris Woakes replacing Mark Wood are enhanced, partly because this would strengthen the batting. The idea of playing Wood ahead of Stuart Broad is eye-catching but highly unlikely to happen. The principle of ensuring that none of the senior players takes his place for granted is sound but in these volatile times this is probably not the case. Everyone is on edge.

In fact, for England to prevail it is the batsmen who must start to deliver. The fresh-faced Keaton Jennings is recalled – and perhaps he can go to forward short-leg rather than Root, who has enough to do – to rejoin Alastair Cook, who is playing his 154th consecutive Test, a world record.

Meanwhile, Pakistan’s only selection issue is how to replace the unfortunate Babar Azam, who has a broken bone in a forearm. Usman Salahuddin is, therefore, likely to make his Test debut in the middle order.

England: Cook, Jennings, Root, Malan, Bairstow, Stokes (or Curran), Buttler, Woakes, Bess, Broad, Anderson

Pakistan: Azhar Ali, Imam-ul-kHaq, Haris Sohail, Asad Shafiq, Usman Salahuddin, Sarfraz Ahmed, Shadab Khan, Faheem Ashraf, Mohammad Amir, Hasan Ali, Mohammad Abbas.