Royal Ascot steps up crackdown on brawling amid the finery

Course has new initiatives, including more use of sniffer dogs Mobile beer hawkers will no longer operate

Police outside the 2017 Royal Ascot meeting where breathalyser tests were on hand in case of suspicious behaviour.

Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images

From the inside looking out this year’s Royal Ascot promises to do what it has always done so well and offer a stage for outstanding racehorses to create unforgettable moments of high drama. From the speed duel between Battaash and Lady Aurelia on day one on Tuesday to Cracksman, Order Of St George and many more exciting talents and prospects that will be racing over the course of the meeting, it is Royal Ascot’s horses that should be making the headlines and advertising Flat racing to the general public as nothing else can.

It is thanks to the royal meeting’s ability to attract a wider audience, though, that it is also necessary to think about those who are outside looking in. Racing has managed to work its way out of the sports section and on to the news pages twice already this year, and on both occasions it was for the same, unwelcome reason: outbreaks of drunken and possibly drug-fuelled violence at big Saturday meetings, including an ugly melee at Ascot itself in May.

Smartphone footage of both fights was shared widely on social media and the fact that the most significant incidents occurred on consecutive weekends at Goodwood and Ascot reinforced the negative image of racecourses as a place where some of the spectators at least are there for a booze-up and a brawl. A similar incident amid the finery and high fashion at the royal meeting this week would compound the damage to the sport’s public image.

It is a story that has quietened down in recent weeks, thanks at least in part to heightened security measures at tracks like York and Epsom, which had a huge crowd on the Hill for the Derby earlier this month and reported no major incidents. Sniffer dogs on the hunt for illegal drugs have become a familiar part of the Saturday race-day routine for spectators at major tracks.

But it would be naive to think the problem has gone away entirely or that there will not be news reporters at the track this week on the hunt for any sign of trouble.

Ayr 2.00 Society Queen 2.30 She's Pukka 3.05 Star Cracker 3.35 My Name Is Rio 4.10 Our Charlie Brown 4.45 Ingleby Hollow 5.15 Munthany

Carlisle 2.15 Theatre Of War 2.45 Power To Exceed 3.20 Mutabaahy

3.50 Mischief Managed 4.25 Kalagia (nap) 5.00 Ad Libitum 5.30 Akamanto

Nottingham 5.50 Delft Dancer 6.20 Tylery Wonder 6.50 Seen The Lyte (nb) 7.20 Medalla De Oro 7.50 Isle Of Man 8.20 Arrowzone 8.50 Sula Island

Windsor 6.00 Tiar Na Nog 6.30 Oona 7.00 Wolf Hunter 7.30 Bahamian Dollar 8.00 Kingston Kurrajong 8.30 Vanity Vanity 9.00 Rock Eagle

Ascot, too, is alive to the possibility and in addition to what are always the most significant security measures of the racing year the course has announced several fresh initiatives, including the threat of a breath test for racegoers who are, or appear to be, drunk on arrival and the use of sniffer dogs inside the course as well as at the entrance, including to inspect any suspiciously long queues for the toilets.

The course promises more visible security personnel, too, and has dispensed with the mobile beer hawkers that have previously roamed the ground floor of the grandstand, easing the pressure on the bar staff. In the circumstances it is probably also for the best that England’s first two games at the World Cup are on either side of the meeting, for all that it was glorious to hear some genuine explosions of noise in the cavernous grandstand when England and Wales were playing two years ago.

Since at least 99%!o(MISSING)f the 300,000 or so racegoers at the course next week will be there to enjoy one of the great British sporting occasions and cause no annoyance for anyone bar the bookmakers, it is possible that some will be irritated by the added emphasis on security.

The simple fact of it, though, is that Ascot has little choice but to be seen to be cautious after the incidents earlier in the year. Racing attracts nearly 6 million spectators annually and there have always been occasional outbreaks of trouble at tracks down the years, including some even worse than those earlier this year.

In the age of smartphones, Twitter and Facebook Ascot’s approach is sensible risk management, which gives the horses the best possible chance to create the lasting memories of this year’s royal meeting.