Lawyer alleges LeSean McCoy set-up home invasion to evict ex-girlfriend

p

Police confirm woman was injured at player’s Atlanta home

Bills running back says allegations are ‘totally baseless and offensive’

LeSean McCoy has been involved in a court case with his ex-girlfriend.

Photograph: Rich Barnes/AP

The lawyer for the ex-girlfriend of NFL running back LeSean McCoy says the Buffalo Bills star orchestrated an attack in order to get her to leave his Atlanta home.

Attorney Tanya Mitchell Graham says in a statement that her client was physically assaulted and “sustained multiple injuries to her head, face and arms during this horrendous attack”.

“Ms Cordon was physically assaulted in the home by a male assailant who entered the home with no signs of forced entry,” read the statement. “The assailant demanded specific items of jewelry that had been previously gifted to Ms Cordon by Mr McCoy, which Mr McCoy had requested back on many occasions. In fact, after Ms Cordon refused to return her jewelry gifts to Mr McCoy, he would often suggest to Ms Cordon that she could be robbed because the jewelry was expensive.”

Local police confirmed on Tuesday that there was a home invasion at McCoy’s home earlier this month, after which a female was taken to hospital requiring treatment.

“The preliminary investigation indicates that this residence was specifically targeted by the suspect or suspects, and not a random incident,” Milton County police said in a statement. “When officers arrived they found one victim who had been physically assaulted by a lone intruder. During the altercation, the suspect demanded specific items from the victim.”

McCoy and the woman have been in court over his attempts to evict her from the home. An image of the ex-girlfriend’s bloodied and beaten face was shown in a social media post, which was later deleted, blaming McCoy for the assault, along with allegations that the player abused his son and dog and took performance-enhancing drugs. The Bills running back denied the allegations on Tuesday, calling them “totally baseless and offensive”.

The Bills and the NFL both say they are reviewing the matter.

A number of high-profile NFL players have been involved in domestic violence allegations. New York Giants kicker Josh Brown admitted in 2016 to abusing his former wife while Ray Rice’s career was effectively ended after he was caught punching his fiancee on camera in 2014. Greg Hardy’s NFL career also fell apart after allegations he assaulted his partner. He is now a mixed martial arts fighter.