Sports quiz of the week: Anthony Joshua, the Queen and a 'boring, big-nose fart'

p

p

Who celebrated twice? Which two are on top? And why are people off pizza?

p Who are the Premier League clubs’ all-time top goalscorers?

Anthony Joshua takes a shot from Carlos Takam in Cardiff.

Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty Images

Tyson Fury says he wants to make a comeback against Anthony Joshua in "the biggest fight ever". Who has Fury asked to join him on his walk to the ring before the bout?

Thom Yorke

Hillary Clinton

Mary Berry

Donald Trump Fury tweeted to Trump: "Who do you think wins the fury vs AJ fight? You can walk me out if you want, be a part of the biggest fight ever."

Which club are yet to concede a goal in this season's Champions League?

Manchester United

Paris Saint-Germain They are also the top scorers with 17 in four games.

Liverpool

Porto

A group of teenagers from the Massimo D’Azeglio high school gathered on a park bench 120 years ago to establish a football club. The team they formed originally played in pink shirts and black neckties but their name and colours have changed since they met on that bench in November 1897. What is the club called now?

Real Madrid

Barcelona

Juventus Juventus ditched the pink shirts for the black and white of Notts County. Shortly after, in 1905, they won their first league championship and the rest is history.

Internazionale

Who said: “I have missed the Queen since I had lunch with her when she invited me to the Palace. I have always wanted to go back. That would be the greatest honour. I have been trying to represent England the best way I can and if that is at some stage recognised by the Queen I would be incredibly honoured"?

Gareth Southgate

Lewis Hamilton Hamilton had been asked if he would like a knighthood and he was more than keen on the idea.

Anthony Joshua

Stan Collymore

Who were the only European team to win their opening game at the Rugby League World Cup?

England

France

Ireland England lost to Australia; France lost to Lebabon; Ireland beat Italy; Scotland lost to Tonga; and Wales lost to Papua New Guinea.

Scotland

Wales

Which football manager said: "Unless somebody decides otherwise, you’ve got me – a boring, old, big-nose fucking fart with shite football – until May... And yes, I am a belligerent fuck"?

José Mourinho

Mick McCarthy McCarthy was speaking after his Ipswich Town team had won away at Burton Albion.

Sean Dyche

Tony Pulis

Why did players from two Irish football clubs, Kentstown Rovers and Enfield Celtic, join forces this week?

To petition against direct rule in Catalonia

To rebuild their stadiums, which had been destroyed by Storm Ophelia

To record Ireland's entry to the Eurovision Song Contest

To rescue an ambulance that was sinking into the muddy pitch where they were playing The ambulance, which had been called to the scene to pick up an injured player, had to be pushed from the mud by both squads.

What had Carlos Correa done a few seconds before he said: “Daniella Rodriguez, will you make me the happiest man in the world. Will you marry me?"

Become a world champion on the Joshua v Takam undercard

Helped his country win their first ever match at the Rugby League World Cup

Beaten Ronnie O’Sullivan while only 17 years old

Won the World Series Correa explained: "I talked to [one of the Houston Astros staff] in the ninth inning and I’m like: 'I don’t want to jinx anything but if we get the three outs, please bring me the ring because I am going to get engaged in the ballpark.'"

Which tennis players will finish the year on top of the men’s and women’s world rankings?

Rafa Nadal and Simona Halep Nadal, won two grand slams this year, will be the oldest year-end No1 since the rankings were established in 1973. Halep didn’t win any of the four grand slams this year.

Andy Murray and Venus Williams

Novak Djokovic and Caroline Wozniacki

Roger Federer and Serena Williams

According to the founder of Papa John's, what is to blame for their declining pizza sales?

More fans watching “un-American soccer”

Protests in the NFL “The NFL has hurt us,” said Papa John’s founder and CEO, John Schnatter. “We are disappointed the NFL and its leadership did not resolve this. Leadership starts at the top, and this is an example of poor leadership.”

"Close-fitting sportswear that discourages good eating"

The US Soccer team’s failure to qualify for the World Cup

You got…

Challenge your friends