Serena Williams pits fighter spirit against Angelique Kerber’s resolve

Williams will equal Margaret Court’s record with victory but Kerber has refound the form that made her a major winner

Serena Williams will play Angelique Kerber in the women’s singles final. The American beat her in the final in 2016.

Photograph: Visionhaus/Corbis via Getty Images

O f the many remarkable qualities Serena Williams has exhibited in a career that began in earnest when she won the first of her 23 major titles 19 years ago, her soul‑deep emotionality leaves the most lasting impression.

It will be on display again on Centre Court on Saturday. The proud new mother, the champion of causes and collector of titles who moves through her gentle sport like a lioness will surely cry, whatever the result of her final against Angelique Kerber. Success in tennis has always meant more to the younger Williams sister than it does to Venus, who insists Serena had to fight harder with lesser gifts as they both rose up from the glass-strewn public courts of Compton, Los Angeles.

In her autobiography, Queen of the Court, Williams says she often takes notes with her into a match – not just reminders of strategies or tactics but epigrams of who she is, the essence of the real Serena, as opposed to the performer. “Show no emotion. UR black and U can endure anything. Endure. Persevere. Stand tall. Be strong. Be black. Now’s your time 2 shine. Be confident. They want to see you angry. Be angry, but don’t let them see it.”

This is raw stuff. In 2015, when she had the calendar grand slam almost in her grasp, she crashed in sight of the finish line, losing to Roberta Vinci in the semi-finals of the US Open. The occasion and the prize overwhelmed her. She cared too much. She insisted after winning Wimbledon that year that she was not thinking about the slam. She was. Almost every day.

Now, at 36, she says she feels free. Asked after her semi-final win against Julia Görges on Thursday what it would mean to equal the all-time record of 24 majors, held by Margaret Court, she replied: “To be perfectly honest, I haven’t thought about that this tournament. Not even once actually. In fact, I’ve probably forgotten about it.”

This time, it is easier to believe her. Williams’s life now encompasses others – her husband, Alexis Ohanian, and their 10-month-old daughter, Olympia. Throughout the tournament – the whole summer, in fact – her press conferences have been celebrations rather than the churlish grump‑fests they often descended into in the past. She has been expansive, relaxed and happy. All of a sudden, the trials of life-threatening blood clots before, during and after her emergency C-section delivery in September are a bad memory. She can smile again, and cry if she wants to.

The last time a mother won Wimbledon, Serena Williams had not been born herself. Evonne Goolagong Cawley won Wimbledon in 1980, the last of the Australian’s seven grand slam singles’ titles, three years after the birth of her daughter, Kelly Inala.

Goolagong Cawley defeated Chris Evert Lloyd 6–1, 7–6 in the final, the first men’s or women’s slam final to be decided on a tiebreak.

Goolagong Cawley missed the subsequent US Open due to being pregnant with her second child – although she later reached the quarter-finals of the Australian Open when four months’ pregnant – and despite attempting a further comeback retired after Wimbledon in 1983 without adding to her grand slam titles.

The previous mother to win Wimbledon was Dorothea Lambert Chambers – in 1914.

But this is not just the Serena show. Kerber has her own story of ups and downs. In her breakout season, 2016, she reached the third slam semi-final of her stop-start career, beating Johanna Konta, before going on to win the final of the Australian Open against Williams, and became the first German slam champion in 17 years. However, her debut major win left her spent and she lost in the first round (ignoring byes) five times in a mysterious slide that was properly halted by the time she got to Wimbledon, where Williams beat her in the final.

Kerber finished that year by winning the US Open and unseating Williams as world No 1. All seemed well. But inconsistency and injury struck in 2017 and, at the French Open, she became the first world No 1 to lose in the first round, to the queen of giant‑killers, Ekaterina Makarova. She lost in the first round of the US Open, too, tumbling out of the top 20 and it seemed her career was in freefall. She split with her coach, Torben Beltz, and took up with Konta’s former mentor, Wim Fissette.

She has since rebuilt her career, like the fighter she is. Renowned as one of the best defenders on the Tour, she arrived at Wimbledon in sound form and good health, and has worked her way through the draw with quiet efficiency.

She tops the tournament table for returns at a staggering 88%! (MISSING)But she is up against the greatest server in the history of the women’s game. Williams has struck 44 aces (second only to Görges) with a right shoulder that collapsed on her as recently as the French Open, forcing her to quit after three rounds. The American has hit 119 unreturnable serves from 237, 20%!a(MISSING)bove the tournament average, winning the point 80%!o(MISSING)f the time on first serve.

They are more than numbers – like the rankings and seedings. They are the meat and potatoes of the game. It is a collision of the best server and the best receiver, a contest that will be decided by something extra, an intangible inner strength. Both have it. Williams might have more of it.

Because Williams, for all that she has found contentment away from her work, is, above all, a tennis player – the best ever, according to Roger Federer – and she means business from first ball to last.

“Hold serve, hold serve, hold serve,” goes another of her Post-it notes in her kit bag. “Focus, focus, focus. Be confident, be confident, be confident. Hold serve, hold, hold. Move up. Attack. Kill. Smile.”