Sports minister introduces martial arts safeguarding code after abuse scandals

p

• Decision follows review in wake of abuse crisis in British sport

• Tracey Crouch she is ‘sympathetic’ to basketball funding plea

Judo is among the sports that come under the new martial arts safeguarding code.

Photograph: Mike Varey/Action Plus via Getty Images

The government has introduced a safeguarding code for martial arts in response to the duty of care and abuse crisis in British sport over the last two years. There had previously been no overarching safeguarding code for martial arts, which is governed by many different bodies.

Tracey Crouch, the minister for sport, said the need for a code had become apparent after a review of safeguarding procedures in the wake of football’s sexual abuse scandal and revelations about bullying and abuse in British Olympic sports.

“In the process of making sure safeguarding policies were up to date one of the things that came out of that review was that martial arts was a loophole,” said Crouch. “Because there are so many different governing bodies, they didn’t have a safeguarding policy. This code is designed to give reassurance to parents who are dropping their children off at popular martial arts centres that there are safeguarding procedures in place. It will allow parents to check what processes are in place.”

Clubs, providers and coaches can pledge to sign up to the voluntary code, which will go live in June. British Taekwondo, the British Kickboxing Council, British Judo and the English Karate Council are all supportive of the code, and worked with Sport England to develop it. “Safeguarding in sport has changed a lot over the last two years,” said Crouch. “I think there are different aspects of safeguarding. There was the exposure around sexual abuse in football but also bullying and harassment are aspects of the safeguarding environment.”

Mike Diaper, Sport England’s executive director, said: “Giving children and young people a positive start in martial arts means they will be more likely to flourish in the sport and stick with it. The safeguarding code in martial arts sets out the expected safeguarding standards and supports martial arts organisations and providers to ensure the sport is safe and enjoyable for all.”

Crouch also defended the £28m given by UK Sport, the funding body, to winter Olympic sports over the last four years in contrast with the total funding cut applied to British Basketball at elite level. The CEO of British Basketball, Lisa Wainwright, said the sport is facing the prospect of having its men’s, women’s and youth teams being banned for two years as a result of being unable to fulfil qualifying commitments.

“I’m sympathetic to British Basketball and we will look at possible solutions we might offer to the situation that it finds itself in,” said Crouch. “It’s an incredibly popular sport and reaches areas that other sports do not.

“It’s clear the no-compromise approach [which dictates UK Sport’s funding model] has changed over the years but ultimately we’re seeing success and I hope we will continue to do so.”