Sports quiz of the week: Six Nations, deadline day and Super Bowl LII

p

p

Who moved? Who blew his trumpet? And who swapped countries?

Olivier Giroud watched Arsenal lose 3-1 on Tuesday night and then watched Chelsea lose 3-0 on Wednesday night.

Photograph: Darren Walsh/Chelsea/Getty Images

Which Premier League club sold their three top scorers from last season in the January transfer window?

Everton

Liverpool

Arsenal Alexis Sánchez to Manchester United, Olivier Giroud to Chelsea and Theo Walcott to Everton.

Huddersfield Town

Daniel Sturridge has now played for five clubs: Manchester City, Chelsea, Bolton, Liverpool and West Brom. Which other player has represented these five clubs in the Premier League?

Craig Bellamy

Scott Parker

Nicolas Anelka Anelka also played for Arsenal – the team Sturridge supported as a kid.

Yossi Benayoun

The Six Nations kicks off on Saturday and concludes in late March, as it has done for the last 17 years. Why did the tournament not end until October in 2001?

Flights were cancelled after 9/11

The fist six matches were postponed due to inclement weather

Players went on strike over pay for international matches

Travel was restricted after an outbreak of foot and mouth disease England lost in Ireland on the last day but still won the championship – just like they did last year.

Which of the four Home Nations will be led by a coach from the northern hemisphere in this year's tournament?

England

Ireland

Scotland Scotland’s new coach, Gregor Townsend, was born in Galashiels, just north of the English border.

Wales

At which club did Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang spend the first three years of his senior career (without making an appearance)?

Real Madrid

AC Milan He was invited to play for Italy’s Under-19s during his spell in Milan.

Bayern Munich

Chelsea

Aubameyang has 56 caps for Gabon. Which country’s Under-21 team did he represent?

France He played for France’s Under-21s in February 2009. David N’Gog, once of Liverpool, scored France’s only goal in a 1-1 draw against Tunisia.

Gabon

Italy

Germany

Only seven Premier League teams have a positive goal difference this season. The top six and ...

Leicester Stoke and Huddersfield both have negative goal differences even though neither are in the relegation zone.

Everton

Burnley

Bournemouth

Who performed at the first Super Bowl halftime show, in 1967?

The Rutles

Autobahn

The Oneders

Al Hirt and two university marching bands Hirt, a trumpeter, was joined by marching bands from the University of Arizona and Grambling State University. The other three only exist in films: Autobahn in The Big Lebowski, The Oneders in That Thing You Do, and The Rutles in All you need is Cash.

When asked if he was an Arsenal fan, who said: “Not particularly, no”?

Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang

Henrikh Mkhitaryan

Olivier Giroud

Donald Trump He has some taste after all.

Super Bowls make up 19 of the 20 most watched TV broadcasts in the US. Which show takes the other spot on the list?

The series finale of M*A*S*H in 1983 The 256th and final episode of the show drew a total audience of 121.6 million viewers.

The State of the Union address in 2018

The Oscars in 2017

USA v Belgium in the World Cup in 2014

You got…

Challenge your friends