Sports quiz of the week: Alexis Sánchez, Kyle Edmund and Javier Mascherano

p

p

Who offered congratulations? Who won? And who knows nothing?

p Tennis quiz: identify the players at the Australian Open

p Football quiz: January transfer window

Hands up if you can play the piano.

Photograph: Manchester United/Getty Images

Complete the sequence: Alexis Sánchez, Memphis Depay, Ángel Di María, Antonio Valencia and ...

Paul Scholes

Eric Cantona

David Beckham

Michael Owen The players who have worn the No7 shirt at Manchester United after Cristiano Ronaldo.

Where will sports fans see Croatia v Switzerland and Romania v Denmark this weekend?

European Rugby Champions Cup

Uefa Nations League

Rugby League Four Nations

Australian Open Marin Cilic v Roger Federer and Simona Halep v Caroline Wozniacki

Which of these statements about Kyle Edmund is not true?

He was born in Johannesburg and now lives in the Bahamas

He made £497,000 in prize money at the Australian Open

His father is Welsh and his mother is South African

He was born in the 21st century He was born in 1995 and moved to Yorkshire aged three.

Javier Mascherano is leaving Barcelona this summer. He has played 334 games for the club under five managers, winning 18 trophies in the process. How many goals has he scored for Barcelona?

None

One A penalty in a 7-1 victory over Osasuna.

Five

Nine

Who was the first person to congratulate LeBron James on scoring 30,000 points in the NBA?

Donald Trump

Michael Jordan

Barack Obama

LeBron James James posted a picture of himself on Instagram earlier that day with a very long caption that began: "Wanna be one of the first to congratulate you on this accomplishment/achievement tonight that you’ll reach! Only a handful has reach/seen it too and while I know it’s never been a goal of yours from the beginning try (please try) to take a moment for yourself on how you’ve done it!"

Michael Carrick is planning to retire at the end of the season to become a first-team coach at Manchester United. Which of these trophies has he not won at the club?

Premier League

FA Cup

League Cup

Champions League

Europa League

Club World Cup

Community Shield

He has won the lot And he's one of the most likeable guys in the game. Good luck Michael.

Philippe Coutinho made his Barcelona debut on Thursday night. Which other Spanish club has Coutinho represented?

Sevilla

Celta Viga

Espanyol The team he played against on Thursday night.

Villarreal

Fletcher Cox will play for the Philadelphia Eagles in the Super Bowl next month. What did Cox say when this week asked if he has any special memories of previous Super Bowls?

"I won it last year. Do your research, idiot"

"I was a backing dancer for Justin Timberlake when he did the naughty on Janet Jackson"

"My first memory is seeing the Eagles play in the Super Bowl in 1980"

"Nah, man. You know, I don’t really watch football. I don’t watch sports" However he did tweet about it in 2012 and 2015.

Complete this quote from Mauricio Pochettino: “I am never going to be manager of Barcelona or Arsenal, because I am so identified with Tottenham and Espanyol. I would rather ..."

"... manage Newport County"

"... be the England boss"

"... work on my farm in Argentina" Although he didn't rule out taking the Real Madrid job.

"... run a burger fan outside White Hart Lane"

Why did Bordeaux release their club captain, Jérémy Toulalan, this week?

They terminated his contract as he was pictured wearing a Toulouse shirt

He had asked to leave as he disagreed with the club’s decision to sack their manager "I was not surprised by his request,” said Bordeaux president Stéphane Martin. “When the results began to decline, he told me to tie his personal fate to that of Jocelyn [Gourvennec, the sacked manager]."

He resigned to take part in the Dakar Rally

He hadn't played all season so asked to leave, saying "being a sub has been killing my buzz"

You got…

Challenge your friends