Talking Horses: Sky Sports Racing wins first skirmish in TV racing battle

N ewmarket’s July meeting, one of the undoubted highlights of the summer racing programme, begins on Thursday with Ed Chamberlin and Francesca Cumani on hand to add polished presentation and glamour to proceedings on ITV. But will this fixture, or any horse racing for that matter, still be on the channel in 2021?

The At The Races channel is to relaunch as Sky Sports Racing in January and Tuesday’s announcement that Ascot had signed up with Sky was the conclusion of the first significant skirmish on the way to the looming battle between the digital broadcaster and ITV for the exclusive rights to the sport when the contract comes up for renewal again at the end of 2020.

The move by the Berkshire track to switch away from Racing UK to its rival racing channel was clearly not welcomed by the incumbent racing broadcaster, with a source at ITV reported as saying: “The timing of the announcement and also Ascot’s decision itself to switch is seen as bizarre within ITV.”

Juliet Slot, the chief commercial officer at Ascot who was at the forefront of the track’s rights review, made some interesting remarks in explaining why Ascot had jumped ship. “We have decided to [join] Sky Sports Racing because of the significant investment and commitment to the sport they have demonstrated, their reach capacity on the basic package [a potential 14 million viewers]. and the brand alignment and cross-promotional opportunities that came with the major sports that Sky cover.”

Does that reasoning seem ‘bizarre’? Chester and Bangor have also announced they are moving to the new channel and Matthew Imi, chief executive at At The Races, said: “For the first time, racing will be positioned and heavily cross-promoted shoulder to shoulder with the other key domestic and global events Sky Sports showcases across its other ten channels.”

Developments over the next two years will be keenly watched by racing and TV sports broadcast professionals alike.

On the track at the July meeting the card opens with the Bahrain Trophy, and trainer John Gosden looks to have decent prospects of lifting the prize for the fifth time in the last eight years with First Eleven (1.50). The selection was one of the -unluckiest losers at Royal Ascot last month, denied a clear run before -finishing strongly into third in the King George V Stakes, beaten just a neck and a nose by Baghdad and Corgi.

That handicap normally throws up a number of winners and the strong feeling is that the selection is ready for this step up in grade from handicaps to Group company.First Eleven has continued to work well since that unfortunate defeat, and after showing improved form since encountering fast ground should be well suited by the quick surface. There is a suggestion that there may be showers in the Newmarket area which would have an impact on already well-watered ground on the July Course but it’s an outside possibility and the son of Frankel should be ideally suited by the prevailing conditions.

Gosden’s near neighbour at Newmarket, Sir Michael Stoute, who had a vintage Royal Ascot, has continued in excellent form with eight winners in the last fortnight alone. Stoute can take the feature race on the opening day with Mirage Dancer (3.35) in the Princess Of Wales’s Stakes. The Frankel colt was favourite but didn’t get the run of the race at the royal meeting in the Wolferton Stakes and is rated better than the fifth spot he finished in that day.

He had previously beaten the winner, Monarchs Glen, with something to spare and should be able to return to winning ways, most likely at the expense of the consistent Barsanti. Stoute should also be on the mark with Gabr (4.45), who lines up in the Sir Henry Cecil Listed Stakes, a race named in honour of the late trainer whose record he surpassed at Royal Ascot this year.

Jim Crowley rides the selection in preference to Emaraaty and his mount seems sure to appreciate dropping in class after running sixth to Without Parole in the St James’s Palace Stakes last time out.

Newmarket 1.50 First Eleven 2.25 Legends Of War 3.00 Tribal Quest 3.35 Mirage Dancer (nb) 4.10 Handmaiden 4.45 Gabr 5.20 Shamshon

Carlisle 2.05 Be Perfect 2.40 Algaffaal 3.15 Toffee Galore 3.50 Ghayadh 4.25 Dapper Man 5.00 Power To Exceed 5.35 Roys Dream

Doncaster 2.15 Tyrell 2.50 Alkaamel 3.25 Zip Along 4.00 Litigation 4.35 Young Tiger 5.10 Supernova 5.45 Poyle Charlotte

Newbury 5.50 Sergio Leone 6.25 Boitron 6.55 Starchant 7.30 Sweet Charity 8.00 Armed 8.35 Outofthequestion (nap) 9.05 Nick Vedder

Epsom 6.00 Dubai Legacy 6.35 Berkshire Spirit 7.10 Dangerous Ends 7.40 Aquarium 8.10 Jeopardy John 8.45 Royal Hall