Andy Murray protege Aidan McHugh slips to boys’ singles loss

Andy Murray may be becoming a man of many hats – as he will demonstrate with a trip to the TV studio for a spot of punditry on Tuesday – but his management interests suffered an unexpected blow on Monday when his protege Aidan McHugh slipped to a surprising first-round defeat in the boys’ singles.

There were high hopes for McHugh, who celebrated his 18th birthday on Monday but was beaten by Harold Mayot of France in three sets, having won the first. He attracts interest as, like Katie Swan who made the second round of the women’s draw, he is part of Murray’s 77 management company, and he reached the third round of the competition a year ago.

Indeed, late last year he attended a training camp with Murray in Miami and he hit with his fellow Scot in Nice in March but failed to reproduce the form that took him to the semi-finals of the Australian Open at the start of the year.

“It was pretty solid but throughout the first set I wasn’t playing like I should have been so I’m more disappointed with that,” he said. “I wasn’t too happy with how I played. The main thing was having a more aggressive mindset but I was so far behind the baseline, pretty passive.”

There is not even the chance to celebrate turning 18 with doubles to play on Tuesday. “I can’t remember the last time I did celebrate my birthday … it is a wee bit weird playing on your birthday but I try not to think of it,” he said. “There’s not much family around so it can be tricky.”

Murray’s interest here is not over however, and his brother, Jamie, advanced in the men’s doubles with Brazil’s Bruno Soares. The pair are seeded fifth and prevailed against the Liverpudlian brothers Ken and Neal Skupski 6-3, 6-4, 6-4 with a break in each set proving enough. Jamie Murray and Soares have won the Australian and US Open together and are now into the quarter-finals. “We’ve played three good matches and tomorrow will be difficult as well but as I keep saying, somebody has got to win it,” said Jamie Murray. “We played well, I was really happy with how I served, sharp up at the net. Didn’t give them much on serve, it was a great performance for us.”

Jamie Murray is one of seven Britons ranked in the top 100 of men’s doubles and he is joined in the last eight by Joe Salisbury, who was victorious yesterday with Frederik Nielsen of Denmark, and Dominic Inglot, who came through in four sets with his Croatian partner Franko Skugor. “To have four different teams in the last 16 is great. It’s exciting for British doubles if we’ve got teams getting to the latter stages of grand slams.”

Indeed, it was a busy day for the Brits, albeit away from the show courts after home interest in the two main competitions came to an end over the weekend.

In the mixed doubles, Jay Clarke and Harriet Dart knocked out the 13th seeds, Max Mirnyi and Kveta Peschke, while Heather Watson progressed in the ladies doubles thanks to a walkover.

Court No 6 featured five consecutive matches with Britons in juniors action and of the eight in action across the outside courts, three were victorious including Jack Draper, the 16-year-old son of Roger, the chief executive of the Lawn Tennis Association between 2006 and 2013. His 6-1, 6-4 triumph over Henry von der Schulenburg was a first win at the All England Club and all the more sweet as it was achieved in the shadow of Centre Court where Roger Federer was cruising past Adrian Mannarino. “It was good, they weren’t cheering my shots, they were cheering his,” Draper said. “It was good to have that, you are playing and hearing all these things and thinking, “I could be there one day’.”

He is joined in the second round of the boys’ singles by Anton Matusevich, 17, but Jake Hersey, Blu Baker and Emile Hudd all lost. In the girls’ singles, Francesca Jones fell in three sets to the 14th seed, Elisabetta Cocciaretto, despite winning the first set 6-2 but the highly rated Emma Raducanu battled past the USA’s Gabriella Price 6-1, 6-4. “I got off to a strong start,” said Raducanu, who was born in Toronto to a Romanian father and Chinese mother but came to the UK aged two. “In the second set, she had five break points to go 5-0 up. We had a very long game and it was a pretty good battle, but I fought well.”