‘There’s no leeway given. We both want to ride winners in King George’

p

Good friends James Doyle and William Buick look forward to Saturday’s big race at Ascot, where they ride the market leaders

James Doyle and William Buick have been friends since they were teenagers.

Photograph: Steve Davies/racingfotos.com/REX/Shutterstock

Back in the summer of 2006 a low-profile teenage jockey stopped briefly at The Pheasant pub outside Lambourn, having agreed to give a lift to the races to an unknown teenage jockey who had neither car nor driver’s licence. James Doyle and William Buick, who became friends as the miles rolled by, were setting out on a journey that has taken both to the very top of their sport. On Saturday they will ride the two favourites for Ascot’s King George VI & Queen Elizabeth Stakes.

“It’s funny,” Doyle reflects. “Who would have known…?” The pair, now 30, have risen through the ranks together. Buick was the more precocious but Doyle’s talent also became hard to miss and in 2014 the pair were hired simultaneously by the mighty Godolphin organisation.

“We’ve always got on very well,” Doyle adds, as the pair sip drinks in the courtyard of a smart hotel in Newmarket. “We sit next to each other every day when we’re racing.” Away from the track, they meet up regularly for meals and nights out and rounds of golf. Being jockeys, of course, there’s no chance of them settling for a bit of idle pitch and putt. Doyle bought Buick golf lessons for his birthday, so he could have some stronger competition when they play.

It hardly needs saying but the fact of their friendship does not alter the way they compete on the track and both are keen that this point should be understood. “There’s no leeway given,” Doyle says. “You’re employed to do the best for your connections at the end of the day, so it’s not like Will gives me a shout and I just move out the way and let him go. We both want to ride winners.”

“It’s an incredibly competitive sport,” Buick says, “and I’d like to think we have the perfect balance.” The fact that they communicate so easily with each other has been a help to Godolphin, since one man often finds himself in need of insight about a horse who is better known to the other.

Sandown 1.50 Havana Rocket 2.20 Look Around 2.55 Ghostwatch 3.25 Dorella 4.00 Sageness 4.30 Antagonist (nap) 5.00 Duke Of North

Yarmouth 2.00 Deeds Not Words 2.30 Pink Iceburg 3.05 Right About Now 3.35 Grey Spirit 4.10 L’Explora 4.40 Revived 5.10 Arabian Jazz

Worcester 2.10 Fit For Fifty 2.40 Smiling Jessica 3.15 Ezanak 3.45 Drovers Lane 4.20 American History 4.50 Play The Ace 5.20 Sheelbewhatsheelbe 5.55 Phoenix Rock

Doncaster 5.15 Muatadel 5.50 Kensington Art 6.25 Its’afreebee 7.00 Florenza 7.30 Rapier 8.00 Right Direction 8.35 Jonboy

Newbury 5.35 Attain 6.10 Motafaawit 6.40 Star Terms 7.15 Tahreek (nb) 7.45 Leading Spirit 8.20 Power To Exceed 8.50 General Jack

Tips by Chris Cook

But Godolphin is not their employer for the King George. It so happens that Sir Michael Stoute needed jockeys for his two runners, Crystal Ocean and Poet’s Word, who dominate the betting for the Ascot race, both being offered by bookmakers at around 2-1. Deprived of Ryan Moore, who must partner the Irish raider Kew Gardens, Stoute reached for two men who have enhanced their reputations this summer, Buick winning the Derby, Doyle earning rave reviews for a narrow success in the Irish Oaks.

They ponder their chances at Ascot. Buick sat on Crystal Ocean for the very first time on Tuesday morning and, although it was just a routine canter on the gallops, he was impressed. “From what I’ve seen of him he looks the consummate professional, a good stayer and plenty of class with it.”

Doyle knows Poet’s Word, having been on him in two races, notably when they bested the odds-on Cracksman at Royal Ascot. The chances are that Doyle will play Poet’s Word late and hope his turn of foot makes the difference but evidently he wants to keep his friend guessing; he praises his mount’s tactical versatility and points out that, under Frankie Dettori, Poet’s Word raced close to the pace in the Dubai Sheema Classic. Buick, however, remembers that he won that race, on Hawkbill, and is not fazed.

Will it be a particular thrill, the two friends going out to ride the market-leaders in one of Europe’s premier Flat races? They are far too seasoned to say yes to that. But if one wins, the other will be instantly glad for him, with no recovery time needed.

“We’ve congratulated each other before, after a race,” Buick says. “We’re professional sportspeople.”

“We’re so busy, you’re straight out for the next ride,” Doyle adds. “It’s, ‘Well done, chap,’ and you move on.”

The King George VI & Queen Elizabeth Stakes at Ascot this Saturday is part of the QIPCO British Champions Series.