Sports quiz of the week: big-hitters, champions, kayakers and the jungle

p

p

Who was sympathetic? Who was contrite? And who learned about white lines?

Bristol City put in a fine display against Manchester City at the Etihad.

Photograph: Matt West/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock

Which player hit the most sixes in the 2017-18 Ashes?

Stuart Broad Broad scored the most for England (four) and Starc scored the most for Australia (three).

Steve Smith

Shaun Marsh

Mitchell Starc

In which city will two European Cup-winning football teams play this weekend?

Madrid

London

Manchester

Nottingham Nottingham Forest (European champions in 1979 and 1980) are playing Aston Villa (champions in 1982) in the Championship.

Liverpool

Who said: "If I had a kid, I probably wouldn’t play the Australian Open either"?

Venus Williams

Judy Murray

Johanna Konta

Nick Kyrgios Kyrgios said: “That’s what happens. People do other stuff. I do other stuff than playing tennis, as well. We can’t be available all the time.”

Why will Japanese kayaker Yasuhiro Suzuki not be competing in the 2020 Olympics in Tokyo?

He “will not compete in a home Olympics due to the pressure from the crowd”

He has been given an eight-year ban for spiking a rival’s drink with a steroid Suzuki drugged his key rival last September so he would fail a doping test.

He wants to compete in the Dakar Rally instead

He is protesting against the "unethical" International Olympic Committee

Why was Bayer Leverkusen coach Heiko Herrlich fined €12,000?

He pushed a ball boy on to the pitch to stop play

He called a fourth official a “baldie”

Simulation Herrlich fell to the ground when an opposition player brushed past him in a German Cup match, something he later regretted: “That certainly looked stupid and happened in the heat of the moment. I would like to apologise.”

Taking off his suit, shirt and vest during a press conference

Which football manager apologised for making "a few spiteful comments"?

Antonio Conte

José Mourinho

Arsène Wenger

Roy Hodgson Hodgson had been angry about a refereeing decision but changed his tune after receiving assurances from the Video Assistant Referee. “I made a few spiteful comments to the ref at the final whistle, but that’s just my nature and I regret them now,” he said. “Neil Swarbrick in the VAR studio has seen it from a better angle and it’s not a handball. So I have to congratulate the system and I have no complaints at all.”

Who was in the jungle when he decided to bury the hatchet and fight?

Conor McGregor

Anthony Joshua

Tyson Fury

Amir Khan Khan plotted his comeback while alone with his thoughts on I’m A Celebrity ... Get Me Out Of Here! “I was in the jungle, on my own and thinking about where I wanted to be in my life,” he said. “I wanted people to see the real side of me and then I wanted to get back on the boxing scene with a bang.”

What did the Bristol City coaching staff have to explain to Pep Guardiola this week?

That grabbing opponents after a match is a bit rude

That the extra white lines on their pitch were from rugby and were not not a tactical device Bristol City assistant Dean Holden said: “Pep was very, very complimentary about the way that we played. He was asking us little questions – like the lines that we had on our pitch here at Ashton Gate. He asked us if it was a tactical thing that we use. We said: ‘No, it’s plainly for the rugby markings.’ He obviously knew a lot."

That they are called Bristol City, not Bristol Rovers

That the game was not using a video referee

Which match will be played at the new White Hart Lane on 14 October?

Argentina v Brazil

England v Germany

Tottenham v Arsenal

Oakland Raiders v Seattle Seahawks Tottenham, who will move back to White Hart Lane in the summer, have a 10-year deal with the NFL.

What was Mamelodi Sundowns captain Hlompho Kekana given with his man of the match award in South Africa?

A lifetime supply of rum

5GB of mobile data That's enough to read 10,000 web pages.

500 cigars

£1,000 worth of gambling credit

You got…

Challenge your friends