Losing my cricket religion but can novelty of baseball fill the gap?

A sporting series of astonishing power, passion, tension and intensity was played out in New York this week. Baseball’s great traditional rivals, the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox, played three games that each swung violently. Finally – while Britain slept on Friday morning – the Sox, having lost two, clung on breathlessly for a consolation win in the third.

This was not the World Series, or anything like it. It was, in theory, a routine part of the regular fixture list barely one-fifth of the way through the season. These teams will reconvene at intervals throughout the long, customarily hot, summer. It just happens that they are currently the two most successful, as well as most resonant, teams in baseball. And, after this week’s events, they are tied for the lead in their division, the American League East, way ahead of all rivals.

In the midst of this epic it was announced that the Sox and Yankees would get together again next year somewhere completely different – the London Stadium: to contest the first two major league games ever played in Europe, following previous excursions to Tokyo and Sydney.

A crowd of 55,000 is expected, a full house for baseball purposes: only Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles can hold that many on the US circuit. And the matchmaking is inspired. These are the teams most likely to have expat adherents. and the ones Londoners are most likely to have heard of.

Furthermore, baseball officials will be aware of British sports followers’ diminishing attention spans. And though the capacity is large, the playing area is not. This pairing – above all the Yankees’ giants from outer space, Aaron Judge and Giancarlo Stanton – is the one most likely to produce home runs. Judge positively salivated when told the stadium’s hitter-friendly dimensions. “I’ve got to see it to believe it,” he said. Baseball scores rarely reach double figures, but these could get to rugby levels, if not quite cricket.

Ah, cricket. That old thing. Apparently, the cricket season is also in progress, though few have noticed. The County Championship is close to its halfway stage, the week after its old-fashioned start-of-May opening, though after Monday it will close down completely for a month and will not resume with any conviction until the swallows start considering their exit strategy in late August.

What will happen in the meantime? Buggered if I know. The Cricketer magazine’s 2018 fixtures wallchart has 21 different colour codings for different kinds of events, putting it way ahead of the London Underground map. And that’s before 2020, when the inmates who have taken charge of the asylum are planning something else entirely, playing a currently non-existent form of cricket between currently non-existent teams. And before 2021, when the bonkers World Test Championship is scheduled for Lord’s. The Cricketer will have to start reinventing the Pantone colour chart.

I became obsessed with cricket when I was six years old. I now find it unfathomable. And if it has lost me, what effect is it having on everyone else? Not a lot seems to be the answer. In the four months since the Ashes, cricket has gained public attention in Britain just once: for the Australian ball-tampering scandal.

The issue is not about whether cricket or baseball is inherently better. Cricket is more aesthetically pleasing, and has two extra dimensions: the significance of the surface, which matters little in baseball; and the under-appreciated concept of the draw. A one-sided baseball game, like a one-sided 50-over match, can be very tedious. And, until recently, cricket had better manners.

What baseball does have is a Test match level of tactical profundity collapsed into three hours. And something else, the thing that cricket administrators seem incapable of understanding. It’s the narrative, stupids.

The baseball season lasts at least six months, a full seven for the two sides that contest the World Series. Teams play an average of six games a week which allows a little time for transcontinental flights. They do not complain, since the rewards are mega. There are no distractions, except a minimal half-term for the All-Star Game in July. The strategies may be complex but the storyline is simple.

What that means for me is that almost every morning from April to September I wake in deepest England to a phone message giving me the result of my adopted team, the St Louis Cardinals, and a little cheer or groan to start the day (more cheers than groans so far this year, thank you). Sometimes the Cards are on a gettable TV channel, so I try not to peek and watch the game as live later.

I have always done the same, depending on the technology of the time, with my birth team, Northamptonshire. Even at boarding school, one could catch the lunchtime, teatime and close of play scores on the radio; get the details from next morning’s paper, and the tables and averages twice a week. But following sport is a habit. Over-complicate the story, as cricket has done to an insane extent, and the habit withers.

No one reads 21 books at once. It is not a question whether literary novels are better than thrillers or five-day cricket better than one. You can only read one thing at a time.

One-day cricket was a fantastic innovation: the 65-over game introduced in 1963 had scope for almost the full range of skills but with added urgency. Since then, we have gone from 65 overs to 60 to 50 to 40, up to 45 (briefly), and of course 20 and, coming soon to a stadium quite likely nowhere near you, 16.4. Destination: vanishing point.

A new working party, the umpteenth, is about to look at a new structure for English domestic cricket. I would like a single county competition to encompass the different forms of the game. It is perfectly doable and offers huge advantages. So that can be ruled out. In any case everything will now be at the mercy of a new “independent” board of directors. Apart from Colin Graves and Tom Harrison, the two officials who have spent the last three years turning mess into shambles, I have never previously heard of any of them.

Will baseball take over? Historically, it has flourished in the UK only in pockets: Hull had 80 teams in the 1940s and a different version flourished in Wales. And whereas the NFL, with its limited schedule, could easily put a team in London, for baseball it is a distant aspiration that could only become real when subsonic air travel is replaced by Harry Potter’s floo powder. And I have a sense that the British are losing their taste for all bat-on-ball games. They love novelty, though, so Sox-Yanks will do fine, unless it rains.

I hope to be there. Deep in my heart I still cherish the cricketing god. But I attend church less frequently and, in quiet moments, have taken to humming Losing My Religion. Cricket has been subverted by false prophets and, indeed, false profits.