Heavy-handed police action evidence Tour has lost touch with its audience

Sky not only source of discontent with Tour as break-up of farmers’ protest reflects event increasingly removed from the characteristics that once made it a fête populaire

As Geraint Thomas passes by in the yellow jersey police manhandle a protester out of the way.

Photograph: Jeff Pachoud/AFP/Getty Images

T ears will not be enough to persuade the disillusioned French public that Geraint Thomas, or Chris Froome, are worthy Tour de France champions. Both Team Sky riders wiped tears from their eyes during stage 16 after they were caught in the clouds of spray wafting across the fields of the Aude after the gendarmerie broke up a mid-race farmer’s protest.

Such protests have long been part of the Tour’s fabric and should not be conflated with other security issues during this year’s race, yet there was a ruthlessness to the reaction of the police that once again reinforced the impression that the modern, corporate-sponsored Tour has become increasingly removed from the characteristics that once made it a fête populaire, a French people’s party.

Some of the striking images from the protest, of defenceless seated protesters being sprayed at close range by baton-wielding police, encapsulate the growing distance between the Tour and its audience. That distance has been further reinforced by the incomprehension throughout the French media of its dominant team, Sky, consistently portrayed as robotic and sinister.

What was once a more intimate and very French event is now the World Cup of cycling. During a press conference on my first Tour, I asked a question of an English rider in English. Jeering and hissing ensued for departing from French, then the established language of cycling. The rider rolled his eyes, answered in French and I didn’t dare ask a question for the rest of that year’s race.

That was a different, more innocent era, pre-Lance Armstrong, in which the French still had champions to spare, a vibrant racing scene and sponsors queuing up to invest. Only two Anglophones, Greg LeMond and Stephen Roche, had ever won the Tour and both of them spoke fluent French.

Now the predominant language is English: the bitter truth is that the era of English-speaking dominance was accelerated in the aftermath of the Festina affair doping scandal, a cataclysm that collapsed and alienated the home audience.

Twenty years after Festina, as Team Sky close relentlessly on yet another victory in Paris, that sense of alienation, from a race as essentially French as Wimbledon is British, is even more acute. Asked what he made of the toxic atmosphere surrounding this year’s Tour, the French star Romain Bardet responded: “We are at the point where the future of cycling is at stake.”

Bardet is not along in thinking that, suspenseful though it may be, this year’s race is already all played out. Thirty-three years after the last home win, the Tour’s place in French culture, as a celebration of the nation’s sporting tradition, is in peril, but that is as much because of its disconnection from its roots as the domination of Team Sky.

As the race moved into the Pyrenees after Monday’s rest day, Sir Dave Brailsford again woke up to acid criticism on the part of the French media, as did Gianni Moscon, labelled the Alexandre Benalla of the peloton, by Le Monde, in tribute to the pugilistic bodyguard at the centre of the “Benalla Affair” currently plaguing the French president.

Brailsford is no xenophobe but his exasperated and misplaced rant during the rest day in Carcassonne has only exacerbated that sense of alienation between Team Sky and the French public.

“I don’t think spitting and throwing things has a place in professional sport,” Team Sky’s principal had said, the morning after Moscon had been thrown off the Tour for launching a haymaker in the direction of a lowly French rider.

“It seems to be the thing that’s done here,” he said. “It just seems to be a French thing, like a French cultural thing.”

The UCI president, David Lappartient, has long advocated a budget cap for World Tour teams. “I can’t blame Sky for being the best,” Lappartient said soon after his election. “They have more money, they have the best riders, they’re very professional so you have to say, ‘OK, well done, congratulations.’”

But Lappartient added: “We don’t want the gap between teams to get any bigger and at the moment the range of budget is between €12m-€34m.” No prizes for guessing which team is at the top end.

Le Monde, too, pointed directly to Team Sky’s greater budgets as the main source of public resentment. “Sky dominate more like Paris Saint-Germain dominate the French league: their riders, their coaches, their methods are superior because their budgets are superior,” the paper said.

“Celebrating Sky winning the Tour is like celebrating Paris Saint-Germain beating Metz 8-0. The British team has found the formula to win races but not the respect of cycling fans. How much longer will the sport’s leaders take to understand that?”