Maro Itoje’s agent banned for 22 months after breach of betting regulations

p

• Matt Hart found to have placed 1,476 bets on sport in 3.5 years

• No suspicion agent used inside information or exerted influence

The Rugby Football Union has banned Maro Itoje’s agent over a breach of betting regulations.

Photograph: Patrick Khachfe/Rex/Shutterstock

Maro Itoje’s agent has been suspended for 22 months by the Rugby Football Union after being found guilty of breaching betting regulations.

Matt Hart of the Stellar Group, which also represents Gareth Bale and Taulupe Faletau, was found guilty of two breaches – betting on rugby matches and receiving proceeds, as well as non-cooperation with a request for information by the RFU.

Hart was found to have placed 1,476 bets on rugby union worldwide between January 2013 and July 2016.

As part of both RFU and World Rugby regulations, agents are not allowed to bet on matches. There is no suspicion that Hart was using inside information or trying to influence a match or its outcome, but the RFU’s anti-corruption officer, Alys Lewis, said: “This decision unequivocally demonstrates that any activity which undermines the integrity of our sport, and exposes players and rugby to potential integrity issues, will be treated seriously.”

Sign up for the Breakdown, our weekly rugby union email.

Chris Robshaw, meanwhile, has admitted it has been “tough to look in the mirror” after what he described as one of the lowest points in his Harlequins career.

John Kingston’s departure as director of rugby was announced this week but he revealed on Thursday that the decision had been taken before Harlequins’ humiliating 35-5 defeat by London Irish last Saturday. Kingston, who leaves at the end of the season after 17 years at the club, did not tell the players until Monday, however.

Robshaw said: “It is tough to look in the mirror. It is not just down to John – as a collective we have not been good enough this year. As players we have not been good enough and unfortunately [John] being the top man, he has taken the stick for that.”

Quins want to identify a successor by the end of the season and the board intends to consult senior players including Robshaw, who was made England captain in 2012 by Stuart Lancaster – one of the frontrunners for the job. After the club signed a strategic partnership with the All Blacks last month, a number of New Zealanders are also in the frame.