Netball needs more male players to become an Olympic sport, says Tracey Neville

More men will have to start playing netball if it is to become an Olympic sport, believes Tracey Neville, the England head coach.

Before the Quad Series against Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, which begins on Saturday, Neville paid tribute to netball’s continued growth both in professional competition and amateur participation. She warned, however, that further development will need cultural change and performance might have to suffer if long-term growth is to be achieved.

“Thanks to the Quad Series we have an international calendar that gives us the opportunity to play against the world No1 and No2 on a twice-yearly basis,” Neville said. “We have never had that before. It’s a real positive step for England netball.”

With the event to be broadcast live on Sky, Neville sees an opportunity to raise the profile of the sport and further the longstanding aim of including netball in the summer Olympics. “[Raising the profile of] female sport in general is always a challenge,” she said. “Australia and New Zealand would disagree because there it’s played equally by both genders. That’s only the case in pockets in the UK. Obviously, to increase male participation in netball would increase the chances of it being included in the Olympics.”

England come into the Quad Series on the back of defeat in a three-Test series against Jamaica last month. Neville believes that results will sometimes suffer as England attempt to develop a professional culture; the sport’s first central contracts, allowing players to go full-time, were awarded only last summer.

“From an internal point of view the players are starting to set a culture,” Neville said. “We are talking 15 players here who are supported full-time. Hopefully that will increase to 30 next year and we will continue to increase that number and make the squad more professional. But cricket and hockey show there are major challenges along the way. You will take hits on performance as you focus on the long-term aspects. The noose around everyone’s neck is the World Cup in 2019 and the funding that is tied in to it.”

The 2019 World Cup is due to be held in Liverpool and will provide a real opportunity for the sport. But funding, Neville admits, is the unignorable factor that will ultimately determine growth. “It’s always a concern for anyone who relies on external funding,” she said. “We are a sport that generates a lot of community involvement, a lot of participation, but we can’t sit there and be comfortable. Having spoken to the board and the performance team we’re working really closely to make our income sustainable.

“That plan 100%!i(MISSING)nvolves ticket revenue. Everyone knows that fans going to watch us at Wembley or in Liverpool keep us able to train at the highest level. It’s easy to sit and watch the match on telly, but coming out is the best thing you can do to support the sport.”

Neville is buoyed by figures that show a substantial rise in the numbers participating in netball. An average of 164,100 people played netball once a week between April 2015 and March 2016, 13,000 more than the previous year.

“Everyone knows it runs in parallel,” Neville said. “The more exposure we have, the more success we have as a netball nation, the more participation will follow. We have a good example of that with cycling. We train out of the National Cycling Centre and we’ve seen the numbers of cyclists increase with the sport’s success. England netball does a really good job linking players with projects, sending ambassadors out into communities, with netball youth camps. It’s giving people exposure. With more exposure we would expect increase in participation.”

Liverpool is quickly making a name for itself as the home of netball. “It’s one of the most popular areas for the sport and I think for me the Echo Arena [where the events will be held] is tremendous. With so many people close to the court it’s a great place to play and of course there’s so much history in that area too.” Asked if that meant she held different views of the city from her brother, the former Manchester United footballer Gary, Neville replied: “No comment.”

Sat 28 Jan South Africa, Durban, 3pm GMT; Thu 2 Feb New Zealand, Echo Arena, Liverpool, 7.45pm; Sun 5 Feb Australia, Wembley Arena, 1pm

All matches in the Netball Quad Series will be shown live on Sky Sports Mix