Kyle Edmund keen to watch England before encountering Novak Djokovic

The British No 1, a keen Liverpool fan, hopes to be among the millions watching England tackle Sweden before facing his own Herculean task on Centre Court at Wimbledon on Saturday

Kyle Edmund celebrates victory over Bradley Klahn earlier this week at Wimbledon.

Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian

K yle Edmund, who gives the impression it would take an atomic bomb to disturb his quiet demeanour, will not be immune to nerves when he plays Novak Djokovic here on Saturday – but the source of his anxiety will be 2,400 miles on the east bank of the Volga in Russia.

The British No 1, a keen Liverpool fan, will share the nation’s goosebumps and reservations around 3pm when England play Sweden in the Samara Stadium in the quarter‑finals of the World Cup – an event the All England Club resolutely pretends is not actually happening.

The committee that determines the order of play – in consultation with the BBC, which is showing both the football and the tennis – could not possibly put their showpiece Saturday match up against England v Sweden so Edmund moves into the late afternoon slot, third on Centre Court at around 5.30pm, once traditionally occupied by Andy Murray.

The 23-year-old Yorkshireman is British No 1 now, of course, while Murray continues his recuperation from hip surgery and, according to his British coach, Mark Hilton, he is becoming used to the ramped-up attention and expectations of fans and the media. Hilton shares coaching duties with the wise old Swede Fidde Rosengren (who will, of course, be conflicted in his loyalties), and said on Friday that there is no reason Edmund cannot beat Djokovic, who has won three of his 12 majors here.

Wimbledon day five highlights: Federer and Monfils dazzle and Serena Williams wins again – video

“For sure, yes,” he asserted, as if he had been asked the most ridiculous question in tennis. “He can win – because of the way he’s been competing, the way he’s been playing, those improvements he’s made, the win that he had against him in Madrid. He can go on that court with belief that he can win the last point, for sure.

“There’s no doubt that Novak’s going to be a real stubborn test. We all know what his level is, especially on big occasions on this court. Kyle’s got his work cut out, but I’m sure it will come down to some very small things. It’s whether he can execute in the biggest moments, stay calm, which he has been doing so well. So I see no reason why he can’t win.”

Djokovic, of course, will not share those sentiments, but now is a good time to be playing the Serb, whom Edmund beat on clay in the second round of the Madrid Open in May, 6-3, 2-6, 6-3. The Serb was still easing his way back on Tour after a long-time soreness in his serving elbow wrecked his 2017 season from Wimbledon onwards and then required surgery. Nevertheless he is Djokovic, once the most dominant player in the game. He has shown alternating flashes of frustration and brilliance in the past month or so, storming out of the French Open in a huff, then looking back to near his best here.

But he meets a different Edmund now. This is the fourth grand slam tournament in a row he has been the last British player standing, men or women. As Hilton observes, he says he will not be able to ignore the football, which starts at 3pm and should be done by the time he walks on to Centre Court.

“Obviously he will want to know what’s going on, you can’t stop that,” said Hilton, an avid Manchester United fan (from Chester, so virtually local).

And, whatever the efforts of the All England Club to maintain the integrity of the tournament by ignoring the football, the fans, even on Centre Court, will know what’s happening in Russia. “It will be interesting to see what the crowd will be like. There will be some sort of atmosphere in there, depending on the result.”

It is an odd crossing of the stars in sport. If England win and Edmund beats Djokovic, the quiet man of tennis might even allow himself a double fist-pump at the home of tennis.