Sports quiz of the week: Wimbledon, hot dogs, pigeons and a clown

p

p

Who loves food? Who might be off to Real Madrid? And who has a new job offer?

Centre Court at Wimbledon.

Photograph: David Ramos/Getty Images

Germany won the Confederations Cup final and the European Under-21 Championship final by which scoreline?

1-0 And that was with most of their best players on holidays.

1-1 (3-1 on penalties)

2-0

3-1

Who said: "I am a happy clown"?

John Terry

Mark Cavendish

Steve Bruce

Warren Gatland "Some of the personal stuff in the press has been completely over the top," said Gatland, who was portrayed as a clown in the New Zealand Herald. "Whoever has been doing that would have no idea how much that has galvanised us. Ironically, it’s been a huge positive. Whoever’s doing that, please keep doing it because it’s not working and it’s probably been great for us. Even ex-All Blacks have contacted me to wish us good luck. I’m a happy clown this week."

John Terry's senior career has taken in three clubs: Chelsea, Aston Villa and ...?

Preston

Fulham

Nottingham Forest Terry played six games while on loan at Forest in the 1999-2000 season. He impressed team-mate Christian Edwards: "We had some snow and the lads would go to training all wrapped up, but John would train in a pair of shorts, happily sliding and diving around in the snow. Everyone else was thinking, ‘What is he doing?’ You could see he was a natural born leader as well. He was outgoing, vocal and really liked to banter and play around."

Charlton

Sonny Bill Williams' red card against the Lions on Saturday made him only the third All Black to be sent off in a Test match. Why were the other two players – Cyril Brownlie in 1925 and Colin Meads in 1967 – sent off?

Punching opponents

Arguing with referees

Slapping team-mates

Kicking opponents who were on the ground Brownlie was sent off at Twickenham and Meads was sent off at Murrayfield, so Sonny Bill Williams is the first All Black to be sent off in New Zealand.

Jeff Horn won a controversial points decision against Manny Pacquiao in Brisbane on Sunday night. What was his job before he started boxing professionally?

A sales assistant at Gap

A massage therapist

A carpenter

A hairdresser

A school teacher Harrison Ford and Matt LeBlanc worked as carpenters; Nicole Kidman was a massage therapist; Kanye West was a sales assistant at Gap; and Danny De Vito was a hairdresser.

Joey Chestnut won the prestigious Nathan’s Hot Dog Eating Contest for the 10th time this week. How many frankfurters and buns did he consume in 10 minutes?

36

59

72 "There’s no secret," said Chestnut after his victory. "I love to eat and I love doing it. I love to win, so I had to figure out my body and push it to the limit."

90

Who said: "Real Madrid could come in for the gaffer over the next six months, you never know. You could probably understand teams would want him, the way we've been playing"?

Sebastian Thill, who scored for Progrès Niederkorn against Rangers

Scott Brown, the Celtic captain "You never know as a player or a manager what is going to happen down the line," said Brown somewhat unconvincingly.

Owen Farrell, the Lions centre

Jermain Defoe, who has joined Bournemouth

How do the staff at Wimbledon deter pigeons from entering the grounds and defacing the courts?

By playing Cliff Richard song Summer Holiday each morning at full blast

By employing 12 former army snipers in the week before the tournament

By deploying a hawk for an hour each morning before the gates open Rufus the hawk also visits the club throughout the year so pigeons know there is a predator in the grounds and roost elsewhere.

By pumping lemon spray into the air through the night

Which tennis player was offered a job by the Western Australia Police, who say working for them is "never boring"?

Nick Kyrgios

Stan Wawrinka

Bernard Tomic Tomic had said he was "a little bit bored" during his first-round defeat at Wimbledon.

Serena Williams

Arsenal signed Alexandre Lacazette for £52.7m this week, making him the third most expensive player in Premier League history after Paul Pogba and …?

David Luiz

Raheem Sterling

Ángel Di María Manchester United paid £93.2m for Pogba and £59.7m for Di María.

Fernando Torres

You got…

Challenge your friends