'A major injustice': Super Netball's new points system draws ire

I t was sold by the game’s bosses as a way to “incentivise teams to make every quarter count” and commentators have praised the system for keeping “games live” and helping them “build drama” for viewers, but some believe Super Netball’s contentious bonus points system should be scrapped.

Certainly, Norma Plummer – who captained Australia as a player, coached the national side to two World Cup victories between 2004 and 2011 and now coaches South Africa – is no fan of the new structure. With four points awarded for a win and a bonus point for each quarter won, she insists it is making the game look soft.

At the half-way point of the season, its application sees the NSW Swifts, with five wins and two defeats, sitting fourth on the ladder, one place below the Queensland Firebirds, on four wins and three losses; but more quarters won and a slightly superior percentage. Under the old system, the Swifts would be third.

“This is elite sport, the number one netball competition in the world, [that] everyone wants to play in. It’s about winning and losing, not winning quarters,” says Plummer, who was inducted into the Australian Netball Hall of Fame in 2015. “In my opinion and among the people I talk to, there are just too many bonus points, when compared to how many you get for a win.”

The weighting of the bonus points is “overdosed”, Plummer believes: “A side can lose three quarters by just one goal and then, in a great performance, get up in the last quarter to win the game and get five points, but the other side has already got three points. To me, that losing team has lost badly, but is rewarded with nearly the same points as a win.

“If they want to give a bonus, it should be one point only, for a team that wins three of the quarters, but not the game. Better still … scrub it. This is about the coaches’ and players’ performances and that is what it should be. It makes our game look soft.”

The stalwart is worried the system could put a team in the finals in August with a second-rate win-loss record, impacting on the very credibility of the competition. “This is not junior netball. It will be a major injustice to see a team eliminated from finals for a team who couldn’t win [enough] matches,” she says.

Super Netball coaches and players have privately expressed concern about the system, but others, like West Coast Fever coach Stacey Marinkovich, have reported a “growth in players’ ability to concentrate” because of the carrot of the bonus point.

Melbourne Vixens’ midcourter Liz Watson is in the cynical camp, saying she is “not a massive fan”.

“I do understand why it was brought in, but for us at the Vixens, it’s about winning games of netball, not quarters, and that’s what should be rewarded,” Watson says. “I guess I’m a bit old-school like that. The possibility of missing finals to a team with fewer wins 100%!g(MISSING)oes against natural justice. I think it would be very, very disappointing for a team to miss finals and have a team who has won less games make it. Really sad.”

Watson says the bonus system doesn’t drive how the Simone McKinnis-coached side approach matches. The Vixens sit fifth on the ladder, with four wins and three losses, just like the third-placed Firebirds.

“From round one, our mindset, which comes from Simone, was ‘we’re here to win games’ and we didn’t really worry about the quarter scores as much, but as the season as progressed, I guess it has slipped in some more, and we get the breakdown on the big scoreboard, so we’re aware of it.

“But having said that, I don’t think it’s changed too much how we actually play the game. We just want to win games, and of course, ultimately that means winning as many quarters as you can. The bonus points are just that, a bonus,” Watson, who leads the league for goal assists with 213, says.

The “general feel” among players is that the system isn’t popular, she adds. “But it’s here now, we just have to work with it.”