Sports quiz of the week: Mayweather v McGregor, US Open and transfer records

p

p

Who made it 49-0? Who cost more than Jordan Pickford? And who cut through?

• Take a look at our previous quizzes

Jordan Pickford, the third most expensive goalkeeper of all time.

Photograph: Richard Heathcote/Getty Images

Floyd Mayweather returns to the boxing ring in August to fight Conor McGregor. Who was Mayweather's opponent in his previous fight, back in 2015?

Canelo Álvarez

Andre Berto Mayweather won on points and was supposedly going to walk away from the sport with an undefeated record of 49–0.

Miguel Cotto

Manny Pacquiao

Rafa Nadal has now won the French Open 10 times. How many grand slams singles titles has he won in total?

13

15 Ten at the French Open plus two at Wimbledon, two at the US Open twice and one at the Australian Open.

19

22

With a year to go until the World Cup kicks off, three teams have guaranteed their places at the tournament: hosts Russia, five-time champions Brazil and … ?

New Zealand

Germany

Australia

Iran Iran, who are managed by Carlos Queiroz, beat Uzbekistan in Tehran this week to guarantee they will appear at successive World Cups for the first time.

How did Pacífico defender Federico Allende try to gain an advantage in an Argentinian cup match against Estudiantes?

By putting moisturiser in strikers' eyes

By poking opposing strikers with a needle "I kept piercing the Estudiantes strikers with a needle," said the Pacifico defender. "We know top division players don't like contact, they don't like if we waste time or if we play dirty. So that was the way to do it. Football is like that. Football is for the clever."

By wearing pungent perfume to give himself more space on the pitch

By whispering Justin Bieber lyrics into their ears at set-pieces to make them laugh

Which of the eight teams competing at the Confederations Cup has won the tournament before?

Australia

Cameroon

Chile

Germany

Mexico Brazil have won it four times, France twice and Mexico once.

New Zealand

Portugal

The Under-21 European Championship kicks off in Poland this weekend, with 330,000 tickets available for the 21 matches. What are the most expensive tickets on sale at the tournament?

£3.80

£8.30 Group games cost as little as £3.12. Decent value, if you find yourself in Poland with nothing to do over the next few weeks.

£83

£380

Southampton have sacked Claude Puel after just one season in charge. Where did they finish in the Premier League?

Fifth

Eighth Puel also took them to their first cup final since 2003.

11th

14th

Which state is hosting the US Open for the first time this week?

Wisconsin Nineteen of the 50 states have hosted the US Open. New York has hosted the tournament the most, with 18.

Minnesota

Ohio

Hawaii

India and Pakistan will contest the Champions Trophy final on Sunday at The Oval. What was the result when the two teams met in the group stage of the competition a couple of weeks ago?

India won by seven runs

India won by 124 runs Using the Duckworth–Lewis method.

Pakistan won by one run

Pakistan won by 17 runs

Everton signed Jordan Pickford from Sunderland for a fee that could rise to £30m, making him the third most expensive goalkeeper of all time after Ederson and … ?

Gianluigi Buffon Buffon was the most expensive keeper in the world for 16 years.

Claudio Bravo

David de Gea

Manuel Neuer

You got…

Challenge your friends