How Australian cricket imploded - a timeline of events in South Africa

Australia arrive in South Africa after a successful summer of cricket that saw them regain the Ashes with a resounding 4-0 win and wrap up victory in the T20 tri-series with New Zealand and England. Only the ODI series against England did not go according to plan – they lost 4-1.

The Test series begins in Durban with an absorbing first day.

The first signs of overt tensions between the two sides appear on day four, when wild celebrations by David Warner and Nathan Lyon after running out AB de Villiers attract criticism. Warner is labelled “a fool” by former South African captain Graeme Smith.

Footage emerges of Warner, Australia’s vice-captain, involved in a heated row with South African wicket-keeper Quinton de Kock on a staircase near the dressing rooms.

The off-field row overshadows Australia’s 118-run victory as Steve Smith’s side get off to a great start on the pitch.

Warner escapes a ban for the confrontation with De Kock after accepting a level two charge of breaching the ICC’s code of conduct. He is fined 75%!o(MISSING)f his match fee and receives three demerit points. De Kock is fined and given one demerit point on a lower level one charge. “We were trying to make it an uncomfortable place for Quinton to bat, no doubt, but we didn’t cross the line,” Tim Paine says.

As new footage of the incident emerges, Warner opens up about his reaction, claiming De Kock made “a vile and disgusting” comment about his wife. He promises to handle future situations better.

The second Test starts in Port Elizabeth. Kasigo Rabada rips through the Australian batting lineup on the first day of play and appears to intentionally bump Smith after dismissing the Australian captain.

A photograph emerges of South African officials wearing masks of rugby player Sonny Bill Williams with supporters who were attempting to embarrass Warner and his wife, Candice, at the match. CSA president Chris Nenzani issues an apology.

Rabada is charged by the ICC after making contact with Smith and faces suspension from the third and fourth Tests.

On day three, Rabada again attracts headlines after he clean bowls Warner, sparking another spirited send-off.

South Africa wrap up the Test with a six-wicket victory as Rabada again rips through Australia. But the bowler learns he has been banned by the ICC and will play no further part in the series.

South African bowler Vernon Philander claims his Twitter account was hacked after an inflammatory tweet suggesting Smith was “just as guilty” as Rabada for the collision.

Rabada is cleared to play in the third Test after all. His two-match ban is overturned after the charge of “making inappropriate and deliberate physical contact” with Smith is downgraded on appeal.

Smith appears mystified at the appeal process that cleared Rabada to play in Cape Town, after he was not invited to give evidence at the hearing. The Australia captain also says it was “a load of garbage” that Philander questioned his integrity in relation to the incident.

The third Test begins in Cape Town as Pat Cummins gives Australia the edge on day one.

With Australia in trouble on the third day, Cameron Bancroft is caught by television cameras tampering with the ball with a grit-covered piece of sticky tape, which he later puts down his trousers in an attempt to conceal the evidence.

At stumps, Bancroft and Smith front the media and Smith admits to a ball-tampering plan hatched by the team’s “leadership group”. “My integrity has come into question and rightfully so,” Smith says, but insists he should remain as captain.

But the calls for Smith’s immediate sacking are loud. The Australian Sports Commission demands “strong and decisive” action.

Cricket Australia CEO James Sutherland appears before the media in Melbourne and confirms an investigation will be undertaken before any sanctions are meted out. The board’s head of integrity, Iain Roy, and the high-performance manager, Pat Howard, are flown to South Africa.

Prime minister Malcolm Turnbull weighs in to express his dismay, saying the incident was “beyond belief”.

Smith later stands down as captain for the remainder of the third Test. Warner also stands down and Paine is handed the captaincy on a temporary basis.

The ICC bans Smith for one match, meaning he will miss the fourth Test in Johannesburg. The ICC’s chief executive, David Richardson, says: “As captain, Steve Smith must take full responsibility for the actions of his players and it is appropriate that he be suspended.”

South Africa complete a thrashing of Australia to pile on the pain for the tourists as newspapers across the world roast the Australian team. “Cheats”, “Shame”, “Sack them all” and “Clown Under” are among the headlines.

Amid speculation over how far back Australia’s ball tampering goes, England captain Joe Root says he does not suspect any cheating during the Ashes series.

Sutherland says he will fly to South Africa to meet Roy and Howard.

Smith loses the captaincy of his IPL side Rajasthan Royals and Australia’s major sponsors reconsider their relationship with the national side.

Reports in the Australian press suggest bowlers including Mitch Starc, Josh Hazlewood and Nathan Lyon are distancing themselves from any “leadership group” in the dressing room.

CA dismiss as “speculation and rumour” a report that coach Darren Lehmann is set to resign as Sutherland lands in Johannesburg, where he is joined by Roy and Howard for a briefing.

They determine that Smith, Warner and Bancroft were the only ones with knowledge of the ball tampering plan and Sutherland tells the media the trio are being sent back to Australia. He confirms Paine will captain the side for the remainder of the South Africa tour – the fourth and final Test starts on Friday in Johannesburg – and says there will be further “significant sanctions” to come in the next 24 hours.

Steve Smith and David Warner are banned from representing their country for a year – with nine months for Cameron Bancroft – as Cricket Australia came down hard on the three players involved in ball-tampering.