Kevin Anderson hopes to help cut down on use of plastic racket covers

• ‘It is a big issue and one we can make a big difference in’

• Anderson will use influence with ATP player council

Roger Federer seen removing a new tennis racket from a plastic cover.

Photograph: Sean Ryan/IPS/Rex/Shutterstock

It is a sight as common as fans sipping Pimm’s at Wimbledon; players take a freshly strung racket from their bag and remove the plastic from it, before giving it to a ball-boy or girl to dispose of. But if South Africa’s Kevin Anderson has his way, it is a sight that may not be seen for much longer.

At a time when the image of plastic in the oceans is becoming a global issue, removing the plastic wrappers from rackets might seem like a small step. The All England Club banned plastic straws from its grounds this year, for the first time, and is conducting a sustainability review, covering the use of plastics across the board. Anderson told the Guardian that the players should help to change things across the Tour in future.

“This is going to be a big initiative for me going forward,” said Anderson, who hopes to use his influence as vice-president of the ATP player council to push through moves to reduce the use of plastic across the board during tournaments around the world.

“I watched a documentary called Plastic Oceans on Netflix and it was an eye-opener for me,” he said. “As soon as you start researching it and googling it, it just sort of becomes apparent very quickly. I’ve always been eco-conscious but these last few months I’ve just stepped up a little and when you’re eyes are open, there’s no going back. Here at Wimbledon, I’ve got a couple of emails to players reminding us of their initiatives, so that’s great to see. But I think it’s a great opportunity, tennis is such a global sport, can connect with so many people. I think it’s a very important issue and I think it’s one I think we can make a big difference in.”

Anderson said the use of plastic to cover freshly strung rackets has its origins in the thought that “keeping the air out of bags” helps keep the string tension. But as he points, out, now they have holes in to prevent there being a choking hazard, that advantage is removed.

Andy Phillips, a stringing service manager with Apollo Leisure, the on-site racket stringers during Wimbledon, believes that covering a freshly-strung racket in plastic has no effect whatsoever. “The bag thing is really to look good,” he said. “It’s an aesthetic thing. Players can also put a bit of advertising on them. At Wimbledon it is difficult but you can get your name on them. But it doesn’t do anything, it is just visual. As a company, we would definitely like to come up with something new.”

A number of players and coaches have offered their support this week to moves to reduce the level of plastic on Tour, particularly the thousands of water bottles used by players during tournaments. Anderson appreciates that the fact that players often use specific drinks, prepared by their teams,, but says it should be something fairly easy to change in future. Now he just needs to convince the players. “It’s hard not to be on board. I’m pretty confident everyone’s going to see this one the same way,” he said.