Sports quiz of the week: Manchester United v Liverpool, pies and literature

p

p

Who runs by the sea? Who needs a bonus? Who won at Old Trafford?

Manchester United and Liverpool meet for the 200th time on Saturday.

Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images

The Winter Paralympics begin this weekend in South Korea. Which country topped the medal table in 2014?

USA

South Korea

Great Britain

Russia The hosts won a record 80 medals. The hosts this year, South Korea, have never won a gold medal at the Winter Paralympics.

Roger Bannister, the first man to run a four-minute mile, died this week. For how long did he hold the record for the fastest mile?

46 days Bannister ran 3:59.4 on 6 May 1954. John Landy, the second man to break the four-minute mile barrier, knocked nearly two seconds off his time just 46 days later. The record currently stands at 3:43.13, a time set by Hicham El Guerrouj in 1999.

4 years

13 years

38 years

Which of these teams has not won a bonus point in this season's Six Nations?

England

Scotland Italy have not won any points at all.

France

Ireland

Wales

Manchester has two representatives in the Champions League in City and United. Which city has two representatives in the Europa League?

Moscow There are three Russian clubs in the Europa League – CSKA and Lokomotiv from Moscow, plus Zenit Saint Petersburg.

Milan

London

Rome

Why was footballer Sanchez Watt (briefly) sent off this week?

Tripping up a ball boy

Puncturing the ball with a stud

Saying his own name Watt was playing for Hemel Hempstead Town when the referee asked for his name. The player repeatedly replied "Watt" but the referee thought he was saying "what?" so sent him off for dissent. The referee retracted the red card after Watt and his team-mates explained the situation.

Breaking wind beside the referee

Which former athlete won an Oscar on Sunday?

Michael Jordan

Kobe Bryant Bryant won the best animated short film award for writing and narrating Dear Basketball. Gary Oldman, who won the Oscar for best actor, celebrated by posing in a signed shirt from his favourite footballer, Marcus Rashford.

Arnold Schwarzenegger

Vinnie Jones

What did Marcus McGuane achieve this week?

He was picked to play in a Six Nations game while only 15 years old

He his two consecutive 147 breaks at the Gibraltar Open snooker tournament

He became the first Englishman to play for Barcelona since Gary Lineker The 19-year-old, who joined Barcelona from Arsenal during the January transfer window, made his debut for the club against Espanyol in the Catalan Super Cup final.

He became the youngest Winter Paralympian in history, aged nine.

Which athlete released a book this week called Seaside Sprint, a follow-up to his previous works Monster Mountain Chase and Dinosaur Dash?

Mo Farah Walcott, Bruce and Lampard have all released books too.

Theo Walcott

Steve Bruce

Frank Lampard

On Saturday Liverpool will try to become only the second team to beat Manchester United at Old Trafford this season. Who were the first?

Basel

Newcastle United

Manchester City And the only team to beat Manchester City in the league this season ... are Liverpool

Huddersfield Town

Who annoyed heavyweight boxer Joseph Parker by calling him "the King of Pies"?

Anthony Joshua

Tyson Fury

Deontay Wilder

Graham Norton "He called me the King of Pies," said Parker. "I'm going to take my shirt off at the weigh-in and honestly, see if I've been eating pies or not! I feel like I'm punching sharp, I'm moving well, making a lot of angles, movements, fitness is good, so everything is on track."

You got…

Challenge your friends