Drone racing: the new sport that could go sky high

It is barely a professional pursuit, yet quadcopter flying has attracted wealthy benefactors, million-dollar TV deals and famous investors. Those on the inside are convinced fame and fortune lie ahead

The organisers of this year’s Dubai World Drone Prix handed out $1m in prize money.

Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg/Getty Images

D rones aren’t just for snooping on Bin Laden showering in the Tora Bora mountains. The idea of racing them has been embedded in pop culture for ages, but it’s only recently that the sport has started to form itself into something recognisably professional. Landmarks have come thick and fast in the past year, most notably with the $1m (£760,000) Dubai World Drone Prix in March.

Now, the fledgling sport is about to reach Britain. Sky has decided to invest $1m into a US drone-racing formula, run by a former Tough Mudder executive; 10 episodes of the Drone Racing League will be shown on Sky Sports Mix. The deal also paves the way for a British drone race, at a venue yet to be decided.

In our vaping, Pokémon Go future-present, drone racing could be the next step in our species’ transition to the stuff of a second-string L Ron Hubbard novel. ESports are already worth half a billion dollars. So, just who are these magnificent men and their flying machines? “Drones” is a sexy, but misleading, name for vehicles that average 25cm in length. Unlike the Predators that launch missiles in western Pakistan and can hover for 24 hours at a time, the drones here are quadcopters: with four rotor blades surrounding a central chassis, they can move at up to 90mph. Racing formulas differ, but the pilots all use cameras embedded in their drones to get a first-person view while operating. The tracks are three-dimensional, left-right, up-down affairs.

A fan at the Dubai event watches the race through first-person-view goggles. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg/Getty Images

With drone racing being such a new sport, a land-grab is under way. So far, the winners are the Sky-partnered Drone Racing League, the National Drone Racing Championships (which held a flagship event on Governors Island, New York, at the start of August) and the Dubai World Drone Prix (which, in addition to the groundbreaking prize money, offered 32 teams an all-expenses-paid trip to the UAE).

The Dubai track is a futuristic assemblage of specially made polymer obstacles that resembles the vertebrae of an 800-metre-long plastic lizard. Competitors must execute tight manoeuvres to pass through different checkpoints. The Drone Racing League prefers a more grungy, urbex – urban exploration – feel. Its first race was in February, at the Miami Dolphins’ Hard Rock stadium; the next was at the abandoned Hawthorne mall in Los Angeles. Neon checkpoints and LED-lit quadcopters add to the air of a speakeasy located somewhere in the orbit of Tatooine. The National Drone Racing Championships, on the other hand, with its grassland setting and slalom-style gates, looks like a gymkhana for BB8.

Visually, the experience is all about immersion – seeing things from a pilot’s eye view and experiencing an unsettling, dreamlike feeling of flying. The Drone Racing League has had to develop proprietary radio signal relay systems in order to broadcast video streams in areas such as tunnels where traditional rigs wouldn’t penetrate. The National Drone Racing Championships became the first to launch a mainstream TV deal when ESPN picked up the rights for its August event.

Competitors wait for the start of a practice race during the National Drone Racing Championships on Governors Island in New York. Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images

This isn’t a sport that has yet developed its own Danny McAskill or Kelly Slater. At the moment, drone racers are mainly men who sit in a control booth, obscured behind their first-person-view goggles. Perhaps acknowledging this, the Drone Racing League has decided they must have self-consciously “funky” names that make them sound like rejects from a casting call for a new Black Eyed Peas lineup. Among the most notable are FlyingBear, a mechanical product design engineer known for his tendency to stand up while racing; Spaztik (yes, Spaztik); the reckless Hazak; calculating Australian rekreK; and Zoomas, a former dirtbike racer who works in construction management.

The naming silliness continues at the National Drone Racing Championships, where there’s top-ranked Charpu, Nytfury, UmmaGawd and CodeRed. Almost all drone racers remain hobbyists, but the sport is seized by the sense that it’s inventing the future. Right now, they claim, we’re still in the era of Juan Manuel Fangio getting out of the car to swig champagne during a Monza pit stop. Soon enough, they argue, Bernie Ecclestone-style big bucks are inevitable. The list of investors is certainly impressive. Among those who have put money into the Drone Racing League are startup godhead Gary Vaynerchuk and Muse’s lead singer Matt Bellamy. With that sort of backing, perhaps soon the names Ayrton Senna and Graham Hill will pale in comparison to UmmaGawd and Spaztik.