Take the kids to … High Sports climbing centre, Brighton

p

p

With indoor climbing set to be part of the next Olympics, interest in the sport is on the ascent. This place offers a fun but professional introduction for kids

Off the wall … High Sports climbing centre, Brighton

In a nutshell

An indoor climbing centre offering top roping (wearing a harness attached to a rope controlled by an instructor or partner below you), lead climbing (for more experienced climbers, where you attach the rope to metal hooks, called quick draws, as you climb) and bouldering (no ropes or harness, shorter routes, a mat below), with three bays of walls up to 13 metres high. Indoor climbing was on the rise even before it was confirmed as an Olympic sport for the 2020 Games. Recognition is likely to send interest sky high. While there’s masses to entertain kids in Brighton itself, this is a great rainy-day option for all ages.

Fun fact

The site was developed in the mid-1930s by the Lawn Tennis Association. It was known as the Wimbledon of the south and the centre court had 2,000 seats.

Best thing about it?

Anyone can give it a go. My son (six) put years of clambering over anything in his path (furniture, trees, me) to good use and made it to the top of the wall with ease. I’m considerably less limber – and scared of heights – but managed a couple of short climbs under the patient and encouraging watch of our instructor, George.

Isabel Choat’s son tackles the climbing wall. Photograph: Isabel Choat for the Guardian

What about lunch?

It’s in a leisure centre so you could eat there if you’re desperate, though my advice would be to bus it back to Brighton where there are plenty of lunch options, plus cake shops and ice-cream parlours. We treated ourselves to peanut-butter ice-cream from Boho Gelato near the pier.

Exit through the gift shop?

Not unless you count the small collection of climbing gear on sale near reception.

Value for money?

One-hour taster session costs £13.50 (for 7-16 year-olds, one instructor to six participants); a family taster is £63 for four people (aged 4+). There are cheaper activities you can do as a family but this is a great introduction to a skilled sport with an enthusiastic instructor.

Getting there

Buses 5 or 27 go from the centre of Brighton to directly outside the sports centre.

Opening hours

Weekends 9am-6pm. Weekdays noon-10pm term-time; 10am-10pm school holidays.

Verdict

8/10

• High Sports Brighton (0345 363 1177, high-sports.co.uk) . Climbing session was provided by Visit Brighton . Accommodation was provided by the YHA Brighton , which is housed in a grand Regency building a minute’s walk from the pier (dorm beds from £15, family room from £29; breakfast £6.25 adults, £3.25 kids under 10)

This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.

The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.