Managing England: The Impossible Job review – tracing 52 years of hurt

H e doesn’t look as if he’s going to score, does he? And he doesn’t. It’s a poor penalty, along the ground and too close to the keeper, who guesses right and saves it easily. “Oh no,” cried Barry Davies, commentating, as England go out of another tournament, on penalties (to the Germans).

God, can it really be 22 years ago, Euro 96? That was the last game for the then England manager Terry Venables, although he was always going to go after the competition (time-consuming legal battles, you may remember). The player who missed his spot kick? The current England manager, who has his first game in charge at a major tournament tomorrow. “Those experiences helped me in this role,” he – Gareth Southgate, one of five England bosses to take part in this timely, thorough and thoroughly enjoyable doc – says. Hope so, Gareth.

The story doesn’t begin there, of course, but 30 years earlier. All football stories begin in 1966. They really knew how to go in hard in those days, didn’t they? No, not Norman Hunter with his tackles, the journalists with their questions. “I must say I’m not terribly sure how to start this interview – do we start by calling you Sir Alfred?” a plummy Fleet Street man asks Alf Ramsey. Well, I guess Alf earned the respect; he did actually win the thing.

After Alf, Don – forgettably and regrettably – then Ron. England managers had proper names back then. Greenwood might have had longer if Kevin Keegan hadn’t headed a sitter wide against Spain in 1982. Future managers have a habit of messing it up for current ones (keep an eye on the future Sir Raheem in Russia).

Look, Hoddle does it, too, just lets Maradona through to score his first in Mexico in 1986. Yes, Sir Bobby and the hand of God, and Glenn who had the ear of God, between them Turnip Graham and El Tel. Next Kev, then Sven the Swede, who had a private life that wasn’t private and not the best relationship with the tabs, on account of being foreign. He’s here to talk about it, sportingly.

After Sven, Steve (McClaren, also easily – and best – forgotten, the wally with a brolly) and Fabio, who still hasn’t bothered to learn the lingo, although the translation is nice. “We get to the World Cup and there’s that ghost smothering you with its white tentacles.”

Hodgson speaks well, too: “As founder fathers, we regard ourselves as custodians of the game.” But when you go out to Iceland, there are no words. And no job.

“It’s not an impossible job, because people keep doing it,” says Big Sam, who – impossibly – kept doing it for just one game, before being stung. Still, he does have the best win rate of all of them: 100%!
(MISSING)
Now Gareth, with it all to do and a lot to make up for. I have, after 22 years, just about forgiven you for the lame penalty, but not for the Pizza Hut ad afterwards. Cashing in on your own mistake and your nation’s – and my – misery. There’s only one way to make amends for that: win it.

You may still be on the first season of Atlanta, the last two episodes of which went out on BBC Two on Sunday. Or you may have begun the new one, Atlanta: Robbin’ Season, which started at the same time on Fox, if you have that. Which makes it tricky to discuss meaningfully or in any kind of detail. So, not very meaningfully and with little detail ... Man of the moment Donald Glover’s sort-of-comedy is possibly the best – almost certainly the freshest – TV around right now. It is funny, observing Glover’s Earn help his cousin Alfred, AKA Paper Boi (so brilliantly convincing by Brian Tyree Henry), try to make it as a rap artist.

So it’s about that and about music industry bullshit, and all sorts of other bullshit, and family, and pressure, Atlanta, the South, race, all kinds of prejudices, and what it is to be black and male in the US … as well as being a vehicle for Glover’s subtle, sharp, poignant, minutely observed, human humour.

It’s not giving too much away to say that the new Robbin’ Season begins with a robbery – of a fast food chicken joint. It’s a front, the restaurant, for a drug stash. And the robbery’s a kind of front, too, because it is soon apparent there are all sorts of other kinds of robbing going on – not just of money, but also dignity, respect and hope. Glover – Henry, too, I hope – will continue to run off with all the awards.

Oh, and there’s a cool cameo in the first episode, from an alligator. An excellent alligator, with a lot of attitude. He looks like he wouldn’t hesitate to rob you of a limb or two. Can’t say much else, except that to not get involved would be to rob yourself.