Monday’s best TV: Sharp Objects; Who Do You Think You Are?

Amy Adams stars in an adaptation of Gillian Flynn’s debut novel as a fragile journo returning home, while Olivia Colman kicks of a new series of the genealogy show and discovers she isn’t Norfolk through and through

Sharp Objects.

Photograph: HBO

Sharp Objects

9pm, Sky Atlantic

All the prestige drama pieces are in place for this take on the old idea of a cop/journalist investigating a murder in the small home town they traumatically left years ago. Amy Adams is the fragile, grief-clouded journo who’s returned from the big smoke; Patricia Clarkson is her estranged mother. It’s based on the book by Gillian Flynn – her debut novel from 2006 – and its director, Jean-Marc Vallée, made Big Little Lies. This has more of a woozy, ghostly aesthetic, but with the same subtext about families being tangled and toxic. Jack Seale

Who Do You Think You Are?

9pm, BBC1

Boy George, Jonnie Peacock and Lee Mack are all to come in this series of the genealogy show. We begin with actor Olivia Colman. She’s Norfolk through and through, she thinks, but her uncle Richard has a family tree whose branches extend further afield than she imagined. Includes a dollop of historical scandal. John Robinson

The NHS: A People’s History 9pm, BBC4

The extraordinary extent of televisual tributes to the NHS on its 70th anniversary illustrates the degree to which it has become almost a secular religion in the UK. This series tells its history via the people who’ve worked for it and been treated by it. Tonight’s second episode follows the story from the mid-70s to the 90s. Andrew Mueller

Versailles 9.30pm, BBC2

“The end game has begun,” mutters the Sun King, as a funeral brings the great, good and not-so-good to his swanky chateau. With one hungry eye on Spain, Louis must try to finesse the Pope’s gruff emissary Cardinal Leto, while spare heir Philippe continues his troubling research into the family tree. Graeme Virtue

Inside the American Embassy 10pm, Channel 4

This concluding look inside London’s Little America sees embassy staff explore the potential benefits Brexit might bring the US economy. When it comes to the likelihood of selling chlorinated chicken to Britons, it’s an uphill struggle. But given they work under Donald Trump, they’re used to challenges. Mark Gibbings-Jones

Storyville: John Curry – The Ice King 10pm, BBC4

A captivating Storyville on the visionary John Curry, the first openly gay Olympian, who transformed the world of figure skating but died tragically young from an Aids-related heart attack. Wonderful library footage, archive letters and interviews tell an absorbing story of politics, sport and sexuality. Ben Arnold

Film choice

August: Osage County, 1.15am, Film4

An A-list Hollywood ensemble gather at the Oklahoma home of Meryl Streep’s newly widowed matriarch in this dour but engrossing adaptation of Tracy Letts’s play. Among the family chewing over the ripe dialogue, Julia Roberts excels as daughter Barbara, terrified of ending up like Mum. Paul Howlett

Sport

ANZ Premiership Netball 8.40am, Sky Sports Main Event

It’s Bay of Plenty Magic v Southern steel in NZ’s top flight.

Tennis: Wimbledon 2018 11.30am, BBC2

Day seven action from SW19, as the men’s and ladies’ fourth rounds get underway.

MLB: New York Mets v Philadelphia Phillies 9pm, BT Sport 2

Baseball action from Citi Field.