Zoe Ball’s Hardest Road Home review – a bike ride with a mission and a message

The presenter’s partner killed himself last year and she is cycling 355 miles to raise awareness of depression and suicide in an affecting film for Sport Relief

Zoe Ball with her father Johnny and family at the finish line in Brighton.

Photograph: Victoria Dawe

Z oe Ball is going on a bike ride. A long bike ride, 355 miles, from Blackpool, where she was born, to Brighton where she lives. And it’s going to be tough. You see, Zoe doesn’t do much cycling. And it is going to emotional: this is a bike ride with a mission, and a message. Last year in May, Zoe’s partner Billy Yates killed himself after a long struggle with depression. Zoe’s ride is for Sport Relief, to raise money and increase awareness about depression and suicide. The figures are bleak: 6,000 suicides a year in the UK, the biggest killer of men under 45 (men are three times more likely to kill themselves than women).

It’s grey and wet when Zoe sets off from Blackpool, and that’s the way the weather seems to stay for the entire five days. She is by no means alone; she has got Greg her trainer with her to encourage her up the hills and help her back on the bike when she falls off. And there’s a TV crew, of course, and vans with back up people and equipment. It’s quite a convoy, travelling along at Zoe speed, and quite a tailback of cars behind. You wouldn’t want to be stuck in that – until you knew what it was about and then hopefully you wouldn’t mind.

Along the way she meets up with well-wishers and celebrities. There’s John Bishop, who has done one of these hellish challenges for charity. The Strictly dancers surprise her in Stratford-on-Avon. Fearne Cotton joins in for a few miles and drops the tone down a gear or two. “Already my lady bits have gone a bit numb,” she says.

More poignantly, Zoe meets other people who have been affected by depression and suicide, such as Penny, whose 18-year-old son Jamie killed himself, and who then helped found the Tomorrow Project. It’s part of Harmless, an organisation that offers help for bereaved families and those at risk of suicide. That’s Tomorrow as in there can be one. “Suicide is really cruel, because you feel like there’s so much you should have been able to do,” Zoe tells her.

Hundreds of primary school children come out of their schools to cheer on Zoe as she pedals slowly past. I hope their teachers are explaining what she’s doing and why. And she’s got Billy with her, in her thoughts and in her heart. “He’s there, he’s with me,” she says.

After a final painful push – over Devil’s Dyke – she makes it to Brighton. Now text Zoe to 70210 to donate a tenner. Make that 70220 if you’ve got a job or you’re not a student or feel like donating £20.

The Secret Helpers (BBC Two) is an odd one. Dan, an affable young man from Norfolk, recently had a double stroke that left him blind and barely able to walk. The sight and most of the motion returned, but he is chronically tired the whole time and it’s touch and go whether he will make it through his upcoming wedding to Suzy.

Could the answer to his troubles come in the guise of wise words, whispered in his ear, from kind strangers around the world? Oh, course it could! Dan gets an earpiece and away we go. So from Norway, Lillian – formerly a Playboy bunny and now a new age diet consultant and nutritionist type – gives him a breathing exercise and tells him to get dried figs and dates to boost his energy levels, even though Dan hates dried fruit. New York cop couple Mark and Joe have some advice about Dan’s wedding speech, telling him it should come from the heart, that he should tell her how important she is to him. From Ireland, Sister Oona gives him a blessing. Gwen and Elisa in South Africa advise him to slow down.

To be honest, I could have given him the same advice, minus the breathing and the blessing. But that’s not the point; it’s about different perspectives and the kindness of strangers and reaching out a helping hand across the world. After Dan, our international sages are advising Brett, who is learning how to be a first-time father to twins.

As television it’s a bit of a dog’s dinner. Suzy and Jess, Brett’s wife, think there’s a documentary being made, hence the cameras. Are the sages sitting through Dan and Brett’s lives in real time, or getting highlights? I was confused about the mechanics. And then, when they speak, our Brits in peril often can’t reply because they are with people and it would give the game away. The advice itself is ordinary, there’s no satisfactory reveal, no moment of discovery … no, it’s a mess, an ambitious idea that doesn’t appear to have been properly thought through. Even if the ideas behind it are nice ones.

• This article was amended on 22 March 2018 to correct the year that Billy Yates died.