Monday’s best TV: Flowers; Grenfell; The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo

p

p

Will Sharpe’s rustic black comedy returns for a second season; documentary footage compiled in the year since the tower block disaster; and Hollywood’s take on Stieg Larsson’s novel

Maurice (Julian Barratt) and Deborah (Olivia Colman) in the second season of Flowers.

Photograph: Des Willie/Channel 4

Flowers

10pm, Channel 4

Visionary original or specious whimsy? Either way, Will Sharpe’s rustic black comedy – which he writes and directs, as well as playing Japanese naif Shun – is completely itself. We are two years on from the first season, and the brittle mental health of author Maurice (Julian Barratt) is threatened by his wife Deborah (Olivia Colman) writing a book about it. Those two, along with Harriet Walter, who joins the cast as a sexually magnetic priest, smother the thought that there’s nothing coherent beneath all the wormwoody oddness. Nightly until Friday. Jack Seale

Fight Like a Girl

7.30pm, BBC One

A short, heartwarming film about Kimberly Benson, who by day works at her parents’ coach hire company, but by night is one of the best female wrestlers in the business. Following her to Japan, where she is a massive star on the circuit, she’s hoping to take a world championship belt home to Ayrshire. Ben Arnold

Kevin Can Wait

7.30pm, E4

Kevin James’s sitcom returns for a second season. Wedding bells beckon at the Gable household, Kendra’s determination to dash up the aisle with her Brit boyfriend the result of Kevin ruining Chale’s visa renewal. Cue a slapdash ceremony, as exemplified by the priest dressed as a civil war general. Mark Gibbings-Jones

Grenfell

8.30pm, BBC One

Compiled across the year since the disaster at Grenfell Tower, Ben Anthony’s documentary distills hundreds of hours of footage. Those directly affected – such as Lorraine Beadle, who moved to Grenfell in 1975, and is filmed as she steels herself to return to the tower and say goodbye – feature prominently. Jonathan Wright

Food Unwrapped

8.30pm, Channel 4

Jimmy Doherty tests chillies with Matt Tebbutt, a macho endeavour uncovering a serious point. Namely the business of breeders’ rights, by which companies have sole rights to seeds they discover. Jimmy travels to South Africa to investigate. Short Straw Dept: Kate Quilton looks into plastic recycling. John Robinson

Storyville: City of Ghosts

10.30pm, BBC Four

Amid the avalanche of horror that has been the last half-decade of Syrian life, there are tales of astonishing bravery. This film tells of a remarkable citizen journalist group within Raqqa. Facing almost unimaginable danger, their determination to document Islamic State atrocities is extraordinary. Phil Harrison

Rooney Mara as Lisbeth Salander in The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo. Photograph: Sony Pictures/Sportsphoto/Allstar

Film choice

The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo, 1.10am, Sony Movie Channel

This Hollywood remake of the 2009 Swedish adaptation of Stieg Larsson’s mega-seller seemed superfluous, but David “Seven” Fincher is a natural fit for the novel’s gloomy nastiness. Rooney Mara rivals Noomi Rapace as the haunted, brilliantly resourceful Lisbeth Salander. Paul Howlett

Live sport

AFL: Melbourne v Collingwood 6am, BT Sport 2. Coverage of the match from the 12th round of fixtures, which takes place at the MCG.

Superleague Netball: Severn Stars v UWS Sirens 6.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Coverage of the fixture from University of Worcester Arena.

Speedway: The British Final 7.30pm, BT Sport 1. The British Premiership climax.