The best sporting events in Las Vegas

Guardian Labs

Paid for by

It’s not just boxing bouts that Las Vegas hosts, there’s a wealth of events in the city to satisfy the most ardent of sports fans

Nascar at the Las Vegas Motor Speedway.

Photograph: Alamy

Las Vegas has finally joined the major leagues. This year the Vegas Golden Knights took their place in the National Hockey League. Meanwhile, the Raiders are moving from Oakland to become the Las Vegas Raiders and by 2020 will be playing NFL games in a new, state-of-the-art stadium. Plus, MGM Resorts has just bought a women’s national basketball team. Beyond the main leagues, there’s a diverse range of action, including motor sports, rodeo, martial arts and rugby.

Monster Energy Nascar Cup

The top tier of Nascar returns to the Las Vegas Motor Speedway for the Pennzoil 400. Manufacturers Toyota, Ford and Chevrolet compete with (extremely) modified stock cars that, in theory, you can buy at your local dealership, although these versions race up to 200mph. There’s also music, entertainment and the Neon Garage, known as “Nascar’s Disneyland”, where fans can watch crews and drivers hard at work on the cars.

Las Vegas Motor Speedway, 7000 N. Las Vegas Blvd, 2-4 March 2018

USA Sevens Rugby features 16 countries in both men’s and women’s tournaments. Photograph: Las Vegas News Bureau, Glenn Pinkerton

USA Sevens Rugby

Las Vegas hosts the North American stage of the Sevens World Series, which is the largest rugby event in the US. A variant of rugby union with much shorter halves, the event features 16 countries in both men’s and women’s tournaments and teams will battle it out across 80 matches. The series has been traditionally dominated by New Zealand, but keep an eye on Pool B where England and the US will face off. The city also goes a little rugby mad, with a series of parties, a parade and pub crawl.

Sam Boyd Stadium, 7000 E Russell Rd, Las Vegas, 2-4 March 2018

Head to the T-Mobile Arena to see the Golden Knights in action in the NHL. Photograph: Icon Sportswire/Icon Sportswire via Getty Images

Vegas Golden Knights

Las Vegas has been waiting quite a while to get its first major league sports team, but this year the Golden Knights embarked on their inaugural National Hockey League season and have got off to a blistering start. The Knights play at the new 20,000-seat T-Mobile Arena located at the Park, making it easy to incorporate a game into your visit.

T-Mobile Arena, 3780 S. Las Vegas Blvd, various dates to end of March

Wrangler National Finals Rodeo

An annual event at the Thomas & Mack Center since 1985, this gathers the world’s best cowboys and barrel racers for rodeo’s premier (and richest) event. The season’s 15 top performers compete at back riding, steer wrestling, team roping, saddle bronc riding, tie-down roping, barrel racing and bull riding. The Las Vegas Convention Center concurrently hosts Cowboy Christmas, featuring events, competitions and lots of shopping opportunities.

Thomas & Mack Center, 4505 S. Maryland Parkway, Las Vegas, 7-16 December 2017

Monster Jam features big trucks performing incredible stunts

Monster Jam World Finals

Big trucks. Lots of ’em. Doing things that 5,440kg (12,000lb), 1,500hp vehicles shouldn’t, such as doughnuts, the two-wheeled challenge, head-to-head racing and freestyle stunts, including 360 backflips. The 2017 event saw history in the making with the first ever full front flip in a monster truck.

Sam Boyd Stadium, 7000 E. Russell Rd, Las Vegas, 23-24 March 2018

Ultimate Fighting Championship

Las Vegas is no stranger to headline fights – it recently put on the Floyd Mayweather v Conor McGregor showdown – and it’s a regular host of the Ultimate Fighting Championship. UFC organises professional mixed martial arts (anything from boxing to jiu jitsu to wrestling) and runs a series of top-level fights. Park Theater is the venue for the Ultimate Fighter Finale in December, but there are contests in the city all year round.

Park Theater at the Monte Carlo, 3770 S. Las Vegas Blvd, 1 December

The PBR World Finals has riders competing for big prize money (and the bulls score points too). Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo

Professional Bull Riding (PBR) World Finals

Billed as “America’s original extreme sport”, the PBR World Finals have become an annual fixture in Las Vegas. They are the culmination of dozens of events across the country that features the world’s top 35 riders, each one aiming to stay on a bucking bull for eight seconds (both the rider and the bull score points). Prize money runs into seven figures. There’s live music and some Las Vegas showmanship, but the stars are the tough guys.

T-Mobile Arena, 3780 S. Las Vegas Blvd, 7-11 November 2018