Man solves mystery of 1930s sports car buried on Salisbury Plain

The mystery of a red 1930s MG sports car archaeologists found buried in a second world war gun emplacement pit during a major excavation has been solved.

Experts had wondered if the MG J2 had been dumped after being used as an officer’s runaround when the MOT test was brought in, but a man has confessed that as a boy he and his gang crashed the car into the emplacement during high jinks.

The boys used to push the MG up a small hill at Larkhill camp in Wiltshire, jump into it and freewheel down. On one occasion they heaved it up a bigger hill but, unsurprisingly, lost control on the way down and it ended up in the old gun emplacement. When the pit was filled in, the car was buried too.

The remains of the car was one of the intriguing finds Wessex Archaeology made on army land that is being cleared for housing on Salisbury Plain.

A vast battlefield landscape of tunnels and trenches dug to train troops has been discovered. More than 200 grenades, half of them still live, were found as well as bits and pieces left behind by the recruits, including combs, toothbrushes, tobacco tins, candlesticks, tins of condensed milk and meat paste, a jar of Canadian cheese and a tin of Australian toffees.

Also found was a 1950s motorbike – and the 1932 MG J2, which would have cost £199 when new, around an average yearly wage. The archaeologists could tell from the tyres that the car was in use until the 1960s but puzzled over how it had ended up in the emplacement.

Patrick Shannon, who lived in the area as a boy in the 1960s, came forward to solve the mystery. He said: “Larkhill was mostly tin huts at that time. I remember the gun pits. In the winter they would fill with snow and we would jump in them for fun. The camp was open and we could wander anywhere we wanted.”

Behind some huts was an old red sports car. “Our gang used to play in it because it was easy to get into and we would jump in, push it down a hill and push it back up again.

“One day some of the bigger boys decided that the small hill was too tame and decided we would go for a big hill. The big boys steered and we pushed off with all of us trying to jump in it as it gained speed. As it got faster it hit bumps, things fell off and boys jumped or fell out.

“I was walking along behind it because I’d fallen off and I saw it go into one of the gun pits and sort of crash in to the side of the pit. No one was hurt and we did try to push it out a few times but we just could not do it so in the pit it stayed. No more rolling it down the hill but we still played in it.

“No one came looking for it and no one even seemed to notice that it was no longer at the back of the huts. Sometime afterwards the old huts were knocked down. The old gun pits were filled in and I seem to remember that the car was still in the pit when they filled it in.”