Friday briefing: ‘Some coaches spend years grooming young people for sex’

Good morning – it’s Warren Murray delivering your early headlines.

Sex between sports coaches and 16 or 17-year-olds in their care is to be made illegal, extending a prohibition that already exists for teachers and care workers.

“Some sports coaches spend years grooming young people and then, as soon as their 16th birthday comes around, they target them for sex,” said Anne Tiivas from the NSPCC’s child protection in sport unit. “Ever since the football abuse scandal broke we have been strongly urging government to close this loophole that leaves children in sports and other out-of-school clubs vulnerable to adults who want to prey on them.”

The sports minister, Tracey Crouch, highlighted how the decision flowed from Andy Woodward’s “very brave” interview with the Guardian that uncovered football’s sex abuse scandal. “I’m pleased to announce that I have secured ministerial agreement to change the law on positions of trust to include sports coaches,” Crouch told parliament.

strongThe Brexit secretary has urged the EU “not to put politics before prosperity” (as some have pointed out: isn’t that what the Tories did by holding the referendum?). Davis made the plea at an economic conference in Berlin where he acknowledged talks with the EU remain difficult. Davis said the UK government hoped for a special trade deal. But leaked EU documents suggest Britain will only be offered a basic one similar to Canada’s, and Dutch MPs are being warned that their country needs to prepare for Britain crashing out. The Goldman Sachs CEO, Lloyd Blankfein, has suggested a second referendum be held, tweeting: “Many wish for a confirming vote on a decision so monumental and irreversible. So much at stake, why not make sure consensus still there?”

strongZimbabwe’s military faces growing calls for a swift movement for democracy amid signs that the deposed president, Robert Mugabe, may be resisting pressure to concede defeat. Mugabe, 93, has been pictured smiling and shaking hands with the general who led a coup late on Tuesday night. Priscilla Misihairabwi-Mushinga, an opposition MP, said: “I am beginning to worry … We have not had any message from the military that speaks to what is happening.” The whereabouts of first lady Grace Mugabe – whom the president was seeking to install as his successor – are not clear.

strongIn one of those decisions seemingly calibrated to cause maximum offence, the Trump administration has overturned an Obama-era prohibition on bringing bits of dead African elephants that have been shot for fun back to the US. Donald Trump’s sons Donald Jr and Eric just happen to be so-called “big-game hunters”. They have been pictured posing with animals they had killed on safari, including an elephant, a buffalo and a leopard. Restrictions on lion “trophies” are being lifted too. “They are rolling out the red carpet to the next Walter Palmer,” said Wayne Pacelle from the Humane Society, referencing the Minnesota dentist who shot and killed Cecil, a famous black-maned lion lured from a Zimbabwe reserve. “That same sort of situation will happen all over again.”

‘Wish I could sit this one out’ – The comedian Sarah Silverman has told of her conflicted feelings towards Louis CK. “I hope it’s OK if I am at once very angry for the women he wronged and the culture that enabled it, but also sad, because he’s my friend,” she said on her show I Love You, America. The Old Vic theatre has apologised over the conduct of Kevin Spacey after receiving 20 complaints of inappropriate behaviour taking place during his tenure.

There had been a “cult of personality” around the actor and a failure to create an environment where people could raise concerns, the theatre said. “The Old Vic apologises wholeheartedly to the people who told us that they have been affected,” said executive director Kate Varah.

Donald Trump has criticised Al Franken after the Democratic senator apologised for groping a news anchor during a 2006 Middle East tour. The president appeared to have forgotten his own boast about grabbing women “by the pussy” and the allegations against him that followed – he has also declined to comment on sexual misconduct allegations against Roy Moore, a Republican senate nominee.

Commuter chaos Japan-style – A train company has expressed profound regret after one of its services left the platform 20 seconds early. “We deeply apologise for the severe inconvenience imposed upon our customers,” said the Metropolitan Intercity Railway. The apology was issued despite no one seeming to notice when Tuesday’s Tsukuba Express pulled away from Minami Nagareyama station, just north of Tokyo, at 9.44.20am rather than 9.44.40am. Anyone who did arrive gasping for breath just after the doors closed would have had scarcely enough time to draft a complaint email – the next train arrived just four minutes later.

Killer comeback – “This lady caused a lot of upset in her country,” joked Donald Trump, pointing to Jacinda Ardern. “No one marched when I was elected,” the New Zealand PM quipped back. Ardern has described the exchange that took place at the east Asia summit where they first met in person. “He laughed and it was only afterwards that I reflected it could have been taken in a very particular way,” Ardern continued. “Only afterwards” – anyone buying that?

In a wide-ranging speech addressing the tumultuous challenges facing media organisations, the Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, has accused Donald Trump and other politicians of actively undermining journalism’s public interest role. Meanwhile, Facebook has become the most powerful publisher in history by replacing editors with algorithms, said Viner, and has divided public debate in a way that challenges democracy.

The Guardian is now funded by more than 800,000 supporters from more than 140 countries, and is read by more people than ever before. Viner said it aimed to embrace “as wide a range of progressive perspectives as possible” and support policies and ideas while not giving “uncritical backing to parties or individuals”.

“If people long to create a better world, then we must use our platform to nurture imagination – hopeful ideas, fresh alternatives, belief that the way things are isn’t the way things need to be. We cannot merely criticise the status quo; we must also explore the new ideas that might displace it. We must build hope.”

Australia’s selectors have confirmed the remarkable, radical overhaul of their side for the first two Ashes Tests with Tim Paine and Shaun Marsh recalled, Matt Renshaw dropped, Peter Nevill overlooked and, in one final twist, Chadd Sayers called up as part of a 13-man squad.

The FA is facing new questions about a potential cover-up after announcing Lee Kendall, England Women’s goalkeeping coach, would not face action over allegations he spoke to Eni Aluko in a mock Caribbean accent. Manchester United have no concerns that José Mourinho could leave next summer to take up another managerial position.

England rugby union coach Eddie Jones is excited by the prospect of unleashing a blistering back three of Jonny May, Anthony Watson and Elliot Daly against Australia on Saturday, as Owen Farrell returns to the side. Rafael Nadal has been awarded damages after the former French sports minister who accused him of doping was found guilty of defamation.

Asian markets were up this morning, buoyed by the US and brighter prospects for US tax reform. Reuters reports that MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan rose 0.8%!w(MISSING)hile Japan’s Nikkei gained 0.4%!
(MISSING)
Overnight the pound was buying US$1.32 and €1.12.

The Mail splashes with the headline: “You baby boomers are so selfish” and says the housing minister is complaining that elderly residents who live a mortgage-free life have no idea what the young of today are suffering. The Guardian leads with an apology from the Old Vic theatre for not creating an environment where staff felt they could complain about Kevin Spacey’s abusive behaviour.

The Mirror splashes on actor Sylvester Stallone and accusations made against him by a woman – something the actor has denied. The Sun is having a crack at the UK’s overseas aid budget – saying some of the money is being spent on helping farm coconuts in the Caribbean. The FT says Saudi Arabian authorities are demanding princes hand over billions of their assets in exchange for freedom from corruption charges. Lastly, the Telegraph leads with news that the number of car tax dodgers has soared by 300%!s(MISSING)ince the government scrapped paper tax discs.

For more news: www.theguardian.com

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.