Friday briefing: Trump takes swing at May's Brexit

Hello, I’m Warren Murray, welcome to Friday morning – and what a morning it is.

The prime minister’s decision to host a UK visit by Donald Trump has backfired against her in the worst possible fashion, with the US president bucketing her plan for Brexit in extraordinary comments that trampled all protocols of relations between world leaders. “If they do a deal like that, we would be dealing with the European Union instead of dealing with the UK, so it will probably kill the deal,” said the president in a Sun interview. “If they do that, then their trade deal with the US will probably not be made.”

Trump suggested May’s Brexit white paper – which faced a barrage of criticism from Eurosceptics as it was presented in the Commons yesterday – was not what people have voted for. “I actually told Theresa May how to do it, but she didn’t agree, she didn’t listen to me,” Trump said. That forced Downing Street to rush out a statement in which May insisted her model “absolutely delivers on the Brexit people voted for. They voted for us to take back control of our money, our law and our borders and that’s exactly what we will do.” Trump undermined May further by saying Boris Johnson was “a very talented guy” who “would be a great prime minister … I was very saddened to see he was leaving government and I hope he goes back in at some point.”

In response, there has been trenchant criticism of Trump’s broadside from Labour and remainer MPs, and a notable lack of vocal support for him from Brexiteers. His limited grasp of the matters he held forth on was exemplified when he appeared to hold Sadiq Khan, the London mayor, personally responsible for immigration in the UK and Europe. “I think allowing millions and millions of people to come into Europe is very, very sad … You have a mayor who has done a terrible job in London.” Khan has nothing to do with immigration.

Protests against the presidential visit continue: the use of a “major PA system” is to be allowed during a London march today but the “baby blimp” has been banned from the skies above Trump’s Turnberry golf course in Scotland. Let us know how you are marking this auspicious occasion.

Presidents Club censured – Trustees of the charity behind a gala dinner failed female workers who were made to wear “sexy” clothes and then groped and propositioned for sex by attendees, the Charity Commission has found. In contrast the Presidents Club took “careful steps” to protect the identity of male guests. The report comes six months after details emerged of alleged “stomach-churning” behaviour by guests at the London dinner attended by senior business figures and politicians. In reply, the trustees pointed out that no one had come forward to complain in response to the commission’s call for evidence. The Presidents Club, which donated to good causes including Great Ormond Street hospital, announced after the scandal that it would close down.

‘Felt like a criminal’ – The MP who unseated Nick Clegg at the 2017 election has quit the Labour party after being suspended over vulgar social media messages from his past. Jared O’Mara ended up being reinstated to the party but said he had been devastated at the treatment he received for “mistakes as a young man”. O’Mara, who has cerebral palsy, said he could not continue “under the pretence that I feel there is a place of acceptance and empathy for me as a working-class, underprivileged disabled man within the Labour party. I have experienced little to make me feel welcome, understood and accepted during this last year.” He will sit as an independent until the next election.

Chronic delays at NHS – The number of patients waiting for an operation has reached 4.3 million, the highest total for 10 years, figures from NHS England show. Growing numbers are having to wait more than the supposed maximum of 18 weeks for planned non-urgent surgery such as a cataract removal or hip or knee replacement. Hospitals treated 88.1%!o(MISSING)f people on the referral to treatment (RTT) waiting list within 18 weeks, well below the target of 92%!,(MISSING) which the NHS has not met since February 2016. Ministers have said they expect their recent £20bn NHS funding boost to fix the problem but chronic understaffing raises doubts. Dr Kathy McLean, medical director of NHS Improvement, said: “We need to ensure that every new pound spent provides the maximum benefit to our patients.”

‘I saw my house sink’ – Devastating floods and landslides across west and central Japan have left 10,000 people in shelters, another 250,000 in homes without water and the government facing the huge task of rebuilding. The death toll has risen to more 200, with scores more unaccounted for.

As the prime minister, Shinzō Abe, visited devastated areas, questioned were being asked about Japan’s ability to withstand extreme weather events. Its towns and cities have been built to survive strong earthquakes but the floods have exposed serious flaws when it comes to heavy and prolonged rainfall. “I saw my house sink underwater and there was nothing I could do. I felt helpless,” said Fumiko Inokuchi, in the town of Kurashiki. “I got married here, and we built this house two years later. We raised our three sons here ... there are so many memories.”

As the dust begins to settle on England semi-final defeat to Croatia, reflection on the progress made under Gareth Southgate has begun. The manager has been credited with masterminding a revival but greater challenges await following their campaign in Russia. “People may have had a feeling that playing for England was always misery and regret and recrimination,” Southgate said. “Now, I think, they have seen it can be enjoyable.”

There is still the matter of a third-place playoff against Belgium though. Saturday’s game is unpopular with the players, but captain Harry Kane, who has declared himself fit, says England will try to play with pride and finish on a high.

“Being in your 50s is a transitional period for actors – you’re not old enough to play the old characters and not young enough to play the young ones, so I felt like, OK, this is my time to direct.” But at 55, after a stint behind the lens, Jodie Foster is back in the acting game with the futuristic Hotel Artemis.

The double Oscar winner, who famously came out on stage at the Golden Globes, tells Hadley Freeman: “I think you’re just born with a certain personality and some people might want to be astronauts and no matter how good they are at flying they can’t handle the zero gravity. I feel like I was blessed with a strength of character that keeps me intact. Although there are definitely parts of me that are crazy.” At the moment, Foster has no forthcoming projects. “I like to wait,” she says. “And you know, I’m super-excited to be acting in my 60s and 70s. I think the roles will be so much more interesting!”

Five months after she finished her maternity leave and four tournaments into her comeback, Serena Williams is in the Wimbledon final again, having seen off the challenge of Julia Görges. In Saturday’s final the American world No 181 will face Angelique Kerber, who was at her resilient best as she repelled the power of Jelena Ostapenko. Headlining today’s play in SW19 is the 52nd meeting between Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic in the second men’s semi-final, following a battle of the big servers between John Isner and Kevin Anderson.

Geraint Thomas slipped ahead of his teammate Chris Froome at the finish to stage six of the Tour de France as Ireland’s Dan Martin, one of the contenders for a top-three finish in Paris, took his first victory since 2013. Maurizio Sarri is set to be confirmed as Chelsea’s new head coach after Antonio Conte was finally relieved of his duties after two increasingly fractious years in charge. Kuldeep Yadav’s six-wicket sorcery set up a thumping win for India in the opening one-day international against England at Trent Bridge. And Phil Mickelson has conceded he does a lot of “dumb stuff”, after speaking at length for the first time about his controversial penalty during the US Open.

China’s June trade grew by double digits, possibly boosted by US and Chinese traders who rushed to fill orders for soybeans, ball bearings and other goods in both directions before tariff hikes took effect. Asian shares have mostly been higher. The pound has traded at $1.317 and €1.129 overnight.

Today’s strong front page bears no surprises as the Trump interview was theirs: “May has wrecked Brexit … US deal is off!” The rest of us love the story too: the Guardian’s version is “Soft Brexit will ‘kill’ UK hopes of US trade pact”. Very similar line taken in the Telegraph – “May’s soft Brexit will kill chance of US trade deal” – and the Times: “May’s Brexit will kill US trade deal, says Trump”. The FT sticks with the Brussels backlash: “Nato allies bridle at Trump claim of pledge to lift defence spending”.

The Mail’s third edition calls it “President’s Brexit attack on May” and goes on that “he suggests Boris would make a great PM”. The Express splash is the “Tory revolt over May’s Brexit plan” but it puts the bad American house guest across the top: “Trump drops a bombshell on May by saying: ‘I want Boris as PM’”. “Donald Thump” is what the Mirror calls him, also referring to it as a “bombshell”.

The i’s effort: “Trump flies into diplomatic storm”. But maybe it’s the Metro that best has the measure of the man: “Trump – Brits like me a lot”.

The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe.

For more news: www.theguardian.com