Thursday briefing: police step up novichok poisoning investigation

This is Alison Rourke with the stories making news on Thursday 5 July.

The home secretary, Sajid Javid, will today chair a meeting of the government’s emergencies committee, Cobra, as police step up their investigation into the poisoning of couple in Amesbury. Britain’s top counter-terrorism officer, Neil Basu, said he was not in a position to say whether the nerve agent was from the same batch that the Skripals were exposed to, but “the possibility that these two investigations might be linked is clearly a line of inquiry”. Around 100 detectives from the counter-terrorism policing network are working with Wiltshire police on the case as the couple, Dawn Sturgess, 44, and Charlie Rowley, 45, remain critically ill in hospital. A number of sites in both Amesbury and Salisbury – areas authorities think the couple visited – remained cordoned off. England’s chief medical officer, Prof Sally Davies, said the risk to the public was low.

strong– Thai rescuers say the 12 boys trapped deep inside a vast cave complex may be able t o walk out if the path can be drained before the monsoon rain expected this weekend. Hundreds of pumps are spewing out water, reducing it inside the cave by up to 40%!,(MISSING) but there’s still work to be done to clear a major basin on the way out where the water is still up to the ceiling. With torrential rains looming, authorities are calculating how long they are willing to let the rescuers inside the cave before they order an evacuation – which could cut the boys off for up to four months.

Brexit puts billions at risk – Jaguar Land Rover – the country’s biggest vehicle manufacturer – has warned it may have to rethink billions of pounds of UK investment, while its 40,000 British employees would face an uncertain future, if the UK leaves the EU single market. Just two days before the PM is due to meet ministers at Chequers to thrash out a post-Brexit deal with Brussels, the company said it needed greater certainty to continue to invest heavily in Britain.

Alesha MacPhail – A teenager has been arrested on suspicion of the murder of the six-year-old who went missing on the Isle of Bute on Monday. Police in Scotland renewed their appeal for witnesses as they announced the arrest. “Anyone who has CCTV at their home or business, or indeed any motorists with dashcam footage which might help with our investigation are also urged to get in touch,” Det Supt Stuart Houston said.

strongTea parties, open days and official services will be held to celebrate the NHS’s official 70th birthday today, with thousands paying tribute to its crucial role in post-war Britain. Westminster Abbey and York Minster will hold services honouring what has become the world’s largest publicly funded health system. The UK’s top surgeon tells the Guardian new surgical procedures and implants should be tested in clinical trials before being made routinely available on the NHS. And you can follow our special live coverage from Kings College hospital in London giving voice to the staff who make the NHS what it is, and their patients, from 8.30am.

Fake chews? – A veggie burger that “bleeds” fake blood has been accused of posing an “existential threat” to New Zealand’s beef industry, amid a growing row over synthetic meat. The Impossible Burger, which is being served on the national carrier Air New Zealand, has drawn the ire of the acting prime minister, Winston Peters, who has said he is “utterly opposed to fake beef,” and the airline should be using real animal products.

As the dust settles on England’s heart-stopping penalty shootout win over Colombia and the euphoria begins to die down, a reality check: there were plenty of heroes in Moscow, but England must offer more if they are to reach the semi-finals. Still, Gareth Southgate’s team have shed some old baggage and there is a cautious optimism that is rooted in humility and work ethic, rather than the arrogance with which recent sides have been associated.

Fears over the fitness of Harry Kane have been allayed and the England captain is set to lead the side out against Sweden. But doubts remain over Jamie Vardy, who has a groin complaint and is in a race to be fit for the game in Samara, where Sweden say they will be on alert for the penalty box diving of Ashley Young.

Meanwhile, Jordan Henderson, who missed from the spot at Spartak Stadium, has admitted he will be forever in Jordan Pickford’s debt after his teammate’s eye-catching save in Moscow.

You can follow all the action on our live blog here.

The 1990s was a narcissistic decade, but it was a strange narcissism, premised on the idea we could remake ourselves any way we liked, virtually from scratch, writes Eve Fairbanks. Great expectations were especially great for girls, she writes, and unmanageable male lust was one of those things we hoped would become a kind of relic that we didn’t take all that seriously. Fairbanks says it sounds paradoxical, but all the power women were told we had led often not to courage, but to hesitation, rationalisation, even self-hatred and self-harm. It was portrayed as a liberation to have the chance to be everything all at once, brainy and gorgeous. But in practice, it was crushing: if we could be anything, we had to be ideal.

Nine months after it began, is there an ebbing of some energy around #MeToo – a tiredness; perhaps an acknowledgement that the contradictions and painful realities it revealed are too big to solve fast? Frantically firing offending males may make it harder for women to tell their complex stories, many of them deep-routed in their journey to fulfil hopes that this generation would of women and girls would live a different experience.

Serena Williams played like a world No 1 as the seven-times champion stormed into the second round of Wimbledon, but it was the end of the road for two others who have enjoyed success over the years at the All England Club, Petra Kvitova and Victoria Azarenka. The world No 2, Caroline Wozniacki, also fell at the first hurdle as an invasion of flying ants disrupted play on a historic day that saw more women’s matches than men’s on the show courts.

In the men’s draw, Roger Federer served up another flawless win to move into the third round while Kyle Edmund plays today, with banter between him and his Swedish coach, Fredrik Rosengren, ramping up ahead England and Sweden’s World Cup quarter-final clash.

Chris Froome, cleared by the UCI on Monday of any doping infraction, admitted he is keen to put the race promoters’ move to ban him from racing in this year’s Tour de France behind him as he prepares to defend his title.

Rory McIlroy has vowed to summon the spirit of his youth as he seeks a return to winning ways at major championships.

And England are expected to fire up the Merlyn spin-bowling machine in the nets at Cardiff on Friday as they search for a method to counter Kuldeep Yadav’s unconventional left-arm wrist spin in their Twenty20 series with India.

Nearly 600 more retail jobs are to go in the UK as the Jacques Vert, Windsmoor and Precis department store brands are wound down by administrators who have failed to find a buyer for Calvetron Brands, which had been restructured following a rescue deal last summer.

Asian stocks were shaky while major currencies barely budged in early trade on Thursday, as financial markets remained anxious on the eve of Friday’s US deadline to slap tariffs on Chinese imports. MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan was down 0.1%! (MISSING), having moved in and out of the red in early trade. The index has lost 1.6%!t(MISSING)his week.

The pound is buying $1.323 and €1.134.

The poisoning in Amesbury features on many of the front pages of the morning papers. “Couple poisoned by Russian nerve agent” is the headline in the Times. “Novichok poisons two new victims” says the Telegraph, while the Daily Mail asks: “How could it happen again?”

In addition to the novichok story, the Guardian also reports the pressure on work and pensions secretary, Esther McVey, to resign for misleading parliament.

“Football’s staying home” is the Sun’s splash, with the paper predicting 30 million will watch the match on TV and the roads and shops will be empty.

The Daily Express leads on Theresa May’s warning to warring ministers that her Brexit plan “is the best of both worlds”. The Mirror leads on an exclusive with Meghan Markle’s father that he will “never see Meghan again”

For more news: www.theguardian.com

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.