Some Nauru staff flown out and more could follow, detention sources say

There have been reports that some case managers, sport and recreation staff, and teachers were flown out on Friday with little explanation

Staff at the Nauru detention centre have been flown off the island in an apparent end to their employment, sources say.

Staff at the Nauru detention centre have been flown off the island in a confusing and sudden apparent end to their employment, detention sources have said.

Sources on Nauru told the Guardian dozens of staff had already been deported, with more expected to leave the island on Saturday. The reason for the departure was not clear.

However, some staff have been told in an email from a service provider that there is “no longer accommodation available in RPC1 so due to shortage some staff are being flown home temporarily”.

RPC 1 contains accommodation for staff as well as for asylum seekers who need extra care and support.

There is no indication the supported accommodation for asylum seekers has been withdrawn but several sources have reported that some case managers, sport and recreation staff, and teachers were flown out on Friday with little explanation.

The affected staff members are employed by Wilsons and Canstruct, which was recently granted a tender to provide services on Nauru after Transfield did not renew its contract with the Australian government.

The Department of Immigration and Border Protection would only confirm that there was “currently some movement of DIBP and contracted staff between accommodation facilities on Nauru”.

“This will not affect basic services for refugees and asylum seekers,” the spokesman said.

Asylum seekers and refugees remain on Nauru, but many have sought access to resettlement with the US under a deal struck by the Australian government and Obama administration.

So far, only about 50 have been processed and resettled. An offer by the New Zealand government to take 150 refugees from Manus Island and Nauru has been repeatedly rejected by Australia, which says it wants to make use of the US deal first.

As part of an effort to clear refugees from the Manus Island detention centre, they were also given the opportunity to seek transfer to Nauru, which offers residency visas to refugees for only 10 years.

Only a few took up the offer, and the centre is now engaged in a standoff – detainees are refusing to leave and the authorities are preventing access to food, water and other essential services.

The international community and human rights organisations have condemned Australia’s actions regarding the Manus developments.

Both detention centres have attracted widespread international condemnation over many years for the living conditions and treatment of asylum seekers and refugees.