Thredbo and Perisher ban 'dangerous' tobogganing

Disappointed snow lovers say sport is cheap and fun: ‘Skiing is for the rich’

• Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon

Two ski resorts in New South Wales have banned tobogganing because it’s too dangerous.

Photograph: Alamy

The Australian ski resort Thredbo has banned tobogganing just one week before the start of the season, citing an increasing rate of injuries from the one snow sport that does not require an expensive lift ticket.

The decision has prompted disappointment among some heading to the New South Wales snowfields this season.

Toboggans have also been banned at Perisher, Fairfax reports.

Thredbo said it wanted “to maximise safety for guests, employees, and resort property”.

Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon

“Thredbo acknowledges it is a favourite winter pastime, however it can be dangerous,” it said.

An “observed trend” of guests taking toboggans or other sliding equipment on ski runs had increased the risk of collisions, loss of control, and falling from equipment.

The ban extended to the public, staff and volunteers, and covered any area owned or controlled by Thredbo.

“No inquiries will be entertained” from tobogganers, it said.

The announcement divided opinions.

“As my kids can’t ski/snowboard, tobogganing was the one thing they could do for hours and have a heap of fun with,” one woman wrote on Thredbo’s Facebook page.

“Tobogganing is … one of the cheapest and most readily accessible fun snow activities,” said one man. “Skiing, on the other hand, is for the rich.”

Ben Wilkie

(@benvwilkie)

Tobagganing is, along with snow fights etc., one of the cheapest and most readily accessible fun snow activities. Skiing, on the other hand, is for the rich: 'Thredbo bans tobogganing at its resort a week out from snow season' https://t.co/tqnQHVFvk6 via @smh

May 30, 2018

Sam Walker

(@samuelsays11)

Tobogganing is by a long way the most dangerous snow activity. I personally know 2 young men that have been killed in tobogganing accidents in the last 5 snow seasons

May 30, 2018

Others appeared to support the ban.

“There’s a hill at Perisher on the side where the lodges are and so many kids and adults use it to toboggan and do so right into the path of snow vehicles and other people walking back to their accommodation,” said a woman on Facebook.

“It is dangerous and whether this ban will be properly enforced is another thing.”

A study by Monash University’s Victorian injury surveillance unit found tobogganing made up just a fraction of hospital visits over a three-year period at Victorian ski resorts.

Between 2004 and 2006 there were two deaths – both related to skiing – as well as 817 hospital admissions and 587 presentations to the emergency department for injuries related to snow sports.

Tobogganing injuries represented 5%!o(MISSING)f hospital admissions and emergency department presentations, but the hospital admissions were longer on average than for skiing or snowboarding.