Friday briefing: May faces Chequers mates

Good morning everyone, Graham Russell here delivering your Friday news.

It has been billed as the prime minister’s most dramatic showdown with her senior team ... since the last one. Yet a united vision for Brexit seems as far off as ever as Theresa May convenes a cabinet summit this morning at Chequers amid talk of resignations, selective leaks and splinter meetings.

On Thursday night, May said it was time “for another step forward” and highlighted plans to strike international trade deals. But leaked ministerial papers suggested there were plans to “maintain a common rulebook” with the European Union on food and farming standards, something that would jeopardise any trade deal with the more free-wheeling US. Backbench uproar spurred Boris Johnson to host a separate meeting of pro-Brexit ministers.

Then there is the issue of customs control at the Irish border. May’s plans for a “third way” would involve the UK tracking goods as they come into the country and levying EU import taxes on them only if their final destination is inside the EU. That would allow the UK to set lower tariffs and strike its own trade deals – a key demand of the leavers.

Here’s a handy guide for what will happen, and what could happen. Proceedings begin at the PM’s official country pile shortly after 10am.

strong – A former Thai navy Seal has died during preparations for the possible rescue of 12 boys and their football coach trapped in a cave for 13 days. Saman Kunan died at about 1am from lack of air after he was returning from placing air tanks along the roughly 3.2km route to the boys. “We will go ahead and keep working,” said Rear Admiral Arpakorn Yookongkaew, the Thai navy Seal commander. “Our morale is still strong.” Maintaining air supplies inside the cave is now the priority as rescuers face the prospect of the boys remaining trapped until the monsoon season ends in October. Follow the latest updates on our liveblog here.

strong Sajid Javid has accused Russia of using the UK as a “dumping ground” for poison and said Britain will consult its allies on a response. “It is unacceptable for our people to be either deliberate or accidental targets,” he told MPs. Police later confirmed Dawn Sturgess and Charlie Rowley fell ill after picking up a contaminated item. In Salisbury, authorities warned people not to pick up unidentified objects but ruled out sweeping the city for nerve agents. The Kremlin has denied any involvement in the latest incident. Reporters Steven Morris and Caroline Bannock visited Salisbury to see how it is faring with a second blow to the city.

Cult leader executed – Shoko Asahara, the cult leader who masterminded the 1995 Tokyo sarin gas attack that killed 13 people, has been hanged along with six of his followers. The Aum Supreme Truth cult, which combined Buddhist and Hindu meditation with apocalyptic teachings, once boasted more than 10,000 followers in Japan. More than 6,000 people fell ill after the attack, carried out in the capital’s subway system.

Cornish cream – Tate St Ives has won the world’s most lucrative prize when it comes to museums, for a £20m extension one judge described as “a profound experience”. “As soon as I walked into Tate St Ives I had an amazingly strong feeling that they’re doing something innovative,” said Melanie Manchot. “The extension has not so much been an addition as a complete reimagining.” The 12-year project doubled the gallery’s size and involved digging into the hillside to maximise space on the site, originally an old gasworks.

Pompeo rocket man - Global tensions are high ... you’re about to negotiate with a nuclear-obsessed tyrant ... what do you do? Take a CD with a song carrying a famous insult to said tyrant of course. Mike Pompeo has apparently picked this unusual approach with North Korea, going armed with an Elton John Rocket Man CD and a letter from Donald Trump.

The quarter-finals get underway today with Luis Suárez set for another shot at redemption when Uruguay take on France in Nizhny Novgorod. In the second game of the day, Brazil meet Belgium with all eyes on Neymar, although it is the Brazil coach Tite whose gravitas and man-management have been revelatory at this tournament. The countdown to the first kick-off has already begun.

Over in the England camp, John Stones has described Colombia as “the dirtiest team I’ve ever come up against”, accusing them of verbal and physical intimidation, and praised England for retaining their composure to prevail on penalties. And as the team prepare to fly to Samara for Saturday’s quarter-final showdown with Sweden, Gareth Southgate has said he will have to adopt “a racehorse trainer’s eye” to make sure none of his players mislead him about their fitness.

Everyone fails, so who doesn’t want to hear that it’s not the end of the world? And while learning to handle past mistakes is a crucial skill, so is the art of responding generously to someone else’s. The image of Gareth Southgate consoling Mateus Uribe, the Colombian player who hit the crossbar, is fast becoming iconic, even to those who couldn’t care less about football.

He of all people knows what it’s like to have failure writ so humiliatingly large, having missed a crucial penalty in Euro 96. It’s not just the impact on a career but the hot lava of social media condemnation, death threats and sheer intensity of hatred. In the hostile World Cup climate, there are genuine fears for the welfare of young players. Southgate demonstrated how failures should be greeted: not with boiling spite, but common decency. There’s something about his kindly and rather self-effacing manner that appeals after a summer of vicious political squabbling. Victory is sweet, but victory with grace even sweeter.

Not since 2007 has a British player failed to make the second week of Wimbledon but afterJohanna Konta and Katie Boulter’s departures on Thursday the nation’s hopes sit solely on Kyle Edmund’s broad shoulders. The defending women’s champion, Garbiñe Muguruza, joined the exodus of seeds as she was battered in the second round by Alison Van Uytvanck, while men’s No 3 seed Marin Cilic was stunned by Guido Pella. And Rafael Nadal has called for the installation of countdown clocks on courts after receiving a time violation before the start of his victory over Mikhail Kukushkin.

Armed police are patrolling team hotels and have been a presence at the Team Sky and Education First hotels in the past 48 hours as one of Team Sky’s rivals voiced his concerns at the threats being directed towards Chris Froome. In an exclusive interview, Sebastian Vettel explains why he likes to mow the lawn and do the school run as he prepares to do battle with Lewis Hamilton in F1’s British Grand Prix on Sunday. And David Willey says England will take the fight to India in the second Twenty20 after brushing off his clash with Bhuvneshwar Kumar in the opener in Manchester.

The long-threatened trade war between the US and China has begun, with US tariffs on $34bn in Chinese goods going into effect this morning. China promised to levy its tariffs immediately after on a similar quantity of US imports.

UK high street sales have fallen for a fifth consecutive month, continuing what advisory firm BDO called a “bleak and crippling start to the year”. The data suggested bricks-and-mortar retailers have endured the worst first half year in more than a decade but Philip Hammond warns in a letter today there will be no quick relief on business rates.

The pound is buying $1.322 and €1.130.

The Guardian leads on the novichok poisoning in Salisbury, with “Javid: Moscow is using Britain as dumping ground for poison.”

Many of the other papers have news that the US trade deal may be in jeopardy, as Theresa May is set to release her full Brexit customs plan to cabinet at a summit at Chequers today.

“Yanks for nothing: Brexiteers fear US trade deal is in tatters,” is the Sun’s headline. The Times has “Rebels face down May over Brexit trade deal”, the Telegraph goes with “Brexiteers horrified as May finally reveals her hand” and the Express has reports of what they call May’s “rallying cry” to cabinet: “We must do our Brexit duty”.

The FT also has a Brexit story, but of a slightly different type: “Brussels rigidity over Brexit puts lives at risk, says German minister.”

The Mail continues with its business campaign with “Hammond snub to high street”, over reports he won’t get rid of a “toxic tax killing local shops”.

The Mirror leads with “Stephen killer’s £10k compo”, with details that David Norris, who was convicted of killing Stephen Lawrence, was given a payout after he was attacked in jail.

For more news: www.theguardian.com

The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.